



                        THE ADVENTURE OF THE LION'S MANE

                               Arthur Conan Doyle



     It is a most singular thing that a problem which was certainly as
     abstruse and unusual as any which I have faced in my long
     professional career should have come to me after my retirement, and
     be brought, as it were, to my very door. It occurred after my
     withdrawal to my little Sussex home, when I had given myself up
     entirely to that soothing life of Nature for which I had so often
     yearned during the long years spent amid the gloom of London. At this
     period of my life the good Watson had passed almost beyond my ken. An
     occasional week-end visit was the most that I ever saw of him. Thus I
     must act as my own chronicler. Ah! had he but been with me, how much
     he might have made of so wonderful a happening and of my eventual
     triumph against every difficulty! As it is, however, I must needs
     tell my tale in my own plain way, showing by my words each step upon
     the difficult road which lay before me as I searched for the mystery
     of the Lion's Mane.

     My villa is situated upon the southern slope of the downs, commanding
     a great view of the Channel. At this point the coast-line is entirely
     of chalk cliffs, which can only be descended by a single, long,
     tortuous path, which is steep and slippery. At the bottom of the path
     lie a hundred yards of pebbles and shingle, even when the tide is at
     full. Here and there, however, there are curves and hollows which
     make splendid swimming-pools filled afresh with each flow. This
     admirable beach extends for some miles in each direction, save only
     at one point where the little cove and village of Fulworth break the
     line.

     My house is lonely. I, my old housekeeper, and my bees have the
     estate all to ourselves. Half a mile off, however, is Harold
     Stackhurst's well-known coaching establishment, The Gables, quite a
     large place, which contains some score of young fellows preparing for
     various professions, with a staff of several masters. Stackhurst
     himself was a well-known rowing Blue in his day, and an excellent
     all-round scholar. He and I were always friendly from the day I came
     to the coast, and he was the one man who was on such terms with me
     that we could drop in on each other in the evenings without an
     invitation.

     Towards the end of July, 1907, there was a severe gale, the wind
     blowing up-channel, heaping the seas to the base of the cliffs and
     leaving a lagoon at the turn of the tide. On the morning of which I
     speak the wind had abated, and all Nature was newly washed and fresh.
     It was impossible to work upon so delightful a day, and I strolled
     out before breakfast to enjoy the exquisite air. I walked along the
     cliff path which led to the steep descent to the beach. As I walked I
     heard a shout behind me, and there was Harold Stackhurst waving his
     hand in cheery greeting.

     "What a morning, Mr. Holmes! I thought I should see you out."

     "Going for a swim, I see."

     "At your old tricks again," he laughed, patting his bulging pocket.
     "Yes. McPherson started early, and I expect I may find him there."

     Fitzroy McPherson was the science master, a fine upstanding young
     fellow whose life had been crippled by heart trouble following
     rheumatic fever. He was a natural athlete, however, and excelled in
     every game which did not throw too great a strain upon him. Summer
     and winter he went for his swim, and, as I am a swimmer myself, I
     have often joined him.

     At this moment we saw the man himself. His head showed above the edge
     of the cliff where the path ends. Then his whole figure appeared at
     the top, staggering like a drunken man. The next instant he threw up
     his hands and, with a terrible cry, fell upon his face. Stackhurst
     and I rushed forward--it may have been fifty yards--and turned him on
     his back. He was obviously dying. Those glazed sunken eyes and
     dreadful livid cheeks could mean nothing else. One glimmer of life
     came into his face for an instant, and he uttered two or three words
     with an eager air of warning. They were slurred and indistinct, but
     to my ear the last of them, which burst in a shriek from his lips,
     were "the Lion's Mane." It was utterly irrelevant and unintelligible,
     and yet I could twist the sound into no other sense. Then he half
     raised himself from the ground, threw his arms into the air, and fell
     forward on his side. He was dead.

     My companion was paralyzed by the sudden horror of it, but I, as may
     well be imagined, had every sense on the alert. And I had need, for
     it was speedily evident that we were in the presence of an
     extraordinary case. The man was dressed only in his Burberry
     overcoat, his trousers, and an unlaced pair of canvas shoes. As he
     fell over, his Burberry, which had been simply thrown round his
     shoulders, slipped off, exposing his trunk. We stared at it in
     amazement. His back was covered with dark red lines as though he had
     been terribly flogged by a thin wire scourge. The instrument with
     which this punishment had been inflicted was clearly flexible, for
     the long, angry weals curved round his shoulders and ribs. There was
     blood dripping down his chin, for he had bitten through his lower lip
     in the paroxysm of his agony. His drawn and distorted face told how
     terrible that agony had been.

     I was kneeling and Stackhurst standing by the body when a shadow fell
     across us, and we found that Ian Murdoch was by our side. Murdoch was
     the mathematical coach at the establishment, a tall, dark, thin man,
     so taciturn and aloof that none can be said to have been his friend.
     He seemed to live in some high, abstract region of surds and conic
     sections, with little to connect him with ordinary life. He was
     looked upon as an oddity by the students, and would have been their
     butt, but there was some strange outlandish blood in the man, which
     showed itself not only in his coal-black eyes and swarthy face but
     also in occasional outbreaks of temper, which could only be described
     as ferocious. On one occasion, being plagued by a little dog
     belonging to McPherson, he had caught the creature up and hurled it
     through the plate-glass window, an action for which Stackhurst would
     certainly have given him his dismissal had he not been a very
     valuable teacher. Such was the strange complex man who now appeared
     beside us. He seemed to be honestly shocked at the sight before him,
     though the incident of the dog may show that there was no great
     sympathy between the dead man and himself.

     "Poor fellow! Poor fellow! What can I do? How can I help?"

     "Were you with him? Can you tell us what has happened?"

     "No, no, I was late this morning. I was not on the beach at all. I
     have come straight from The Gables. What can I do?"

     "You can hurry to the police-station at Fulworth. Report the matter
     at once."

     Without a word he made off at top speed, and I proceeded to take the
     matter in hand, while Stackhurst, dazed at this tragedy, remained by
     the body. My first task naturally was to note who was on the beach.
     From the top of the path I could see the whole sweep of it, and it
     was absolutely deserted save that two or three dark figures could be
     seen far away moving towards the village of Fulworth. Having
     satisfied myself upon this point, I walked slowly down the path.
     There was clay or soft marl mixed with the chalk, and every here and
     there I saw the same footstep, both ascending and descending. No one
     else had gone down to the beach by this track that morning. At one
     place I observed the print of an open hand with the fingers towards
     the incline. This could only mean that poor McPherson had fallen as
     he ascended. There were rounded depressions, too, which suggested
     that he had come down upon his knees more than once. At the bottom of
     the path was the considerable lagoon left by the retreating tide. At
     the side of it McPherson had undressed, for there lay his towel on a
     rock. It was folded and dry, so that it would seem that, after all,
     he had never entered the water. Once or twice as I hunted round amid
     the hard shingle I came on little patches of sand where the print of
     his canvas shoe, and also of his naked foot, could be seen. The
     latter fact proved that he had made all ready to bathe, though the
     towel indicated that he had not actually done so.

     And here was the problem clearly defined--as strange a one as had
     ever confronted me. The man had not been on the beach more than a
     quarter of an hour at the most. Stackhurst had followed him from The
     Gables, so there could be no doubt about that. He had gone to bathe
     and had stripped, as the naked footsteps showed. Then he had suddenly
     huddled on his clothes again--they were all dishevelled and
     unfastened--and he had returned without bathing, or at any rate
     without drying himself. And the reason for his change of purpose had
     been that he had been scourged in some savage, inhuman fashion,
     tortured until he bit his lip through in his agony, and was left with
     only strength enough to crawl away and to die. Who had done this
     barbarous deed? There were, it is true, small grottos and caves in
     the base of the cliffs, but the low sun shone directly into them, and
     there was no place for concealment. Then, again, there were those
     distant figures on the beach. They seemed too far away to have been
     connected with the crime, and the broad lagoon in which McPherson had
     intended to bathe lay between him and them, lapping up to the rocks.
     On the sea two or three fishing-boats were at no great distance.
     Their occupants might be examined at our leisure. There were several
     roads for inquiry, but none which led to any very obvious goal.

     When I at last returned to the body I found that a little group of
     wondering folk had gathered round it. Stackhurst was, of course,
     still there, and Ian Murdoch had just arrived with Anderson, the
     village constable, a big, ginger-moustached man of the slow, solid
     Sussex breed--a breed which covers much good sense under a heavy,
     silent exterior. He listened to everything, took note of all we said,
     and finally drew me aside.

     "I'd be glad of your advice, Mr. Holmes. This is a big thing for me
     to handle, and I'll hear of it from Lewes if I go wrong."

     I advised him to send for his immediate superior, and for a doctor;
     also to allow nothing to be moved, and as few fresh footmarks as
     possible to be made, until they came. In the meantime I searched the
     dead man's pockets. There were his handkerchief, a large knife, and a
     small folding card-case. From this projected a slip of paper, which I
     unfolded and handed to the constable. There was written on it in a
     scrawling, feminine hand:

     I will be there, you may be sure.
     Maudie.

     It read like a love affair, an assignation, though when and where
     were a blank. The constable replaced it in the card-case and returned
     it with the other things to the pockets of the Burberry. Then, as
     nothing more suggested itself, I walked back to my house for
     breakfast, having first arranged that the base of the cliffs should
     be thoroughly searched.

     Stackhurst was round in an hour or two to tell me that the body had
     been removed to The Gables, where the inquest would be held. He
     brought with him some serious and definite news. As I expected,
     nothing had been found in the small caves below the cliff, but he had
     examined the papers in McPherson's desk, and there were several which
     showed an intimate correspondence with a certain Miss Maud Bellamy,
     of Fulworth. We had then established the identity of the writer of
     the note.

     "The police have the letters," he explained. "I could not bring them.
     But there is no doubt that it was a serious love affair. I see no
     reason, however, to connect it with that horrible happening save,
     indeed, that the lady had made an appointment with him."

     "But hardly at a bathing-pool which all of you were in the habit of
     using," I remarked.

     "It is mere chance," said he, "that several of the students were not
     with McPherson."

     "Was it mere chance?"

     Stackhurst knit his brows in thought.

     "Ian Murdoch held them back," said he. "He would insist upon some
     algebraic demonstration before breakfast. Poor chap, he is dreadfully
     cut up about it all."

     "And yet I gather that they were not friends."

     "At one time they were not. But for a year or more Murdoch has been
     as near to McPherson as he ever could be to anyone. He is not of a
     very sympathetic disposition by nature."

     "So I understand. I seem to remember your telling me once about a
     quarrel over the ill-usage of a dog."

     "That blew over all right."

     "But left some vindictive feeling, perhaps."

     "No, no, I am sure they were real friends."

     "Well, then, we must explore the matter of the girl. Do you know
     her?"

     "Everyone knows her. She is the beauty of the neighbourhood--a real
     beauty, Holmes, who would draw attention everywhere. I knew that
     McPherson was attracted by her, but I had no notion that it had gone
     so far as these letters would seem to indicate."

     "But who is she?"

     "She is the daughter of old Tom Bellamy, who owns all the boats and
     bathing-cots at Fulworth. He was a fisherman to start with, but is
     now a man of some substance. He and his son William run the
     business."

     "Shall we walk into Fulworth and see them?"

     "On what pretext?"

     "Oh, we can easily find a pretext. After all, this poor man did not
     ill-use himself in this outrageous way. Some human hand was on the
     handle of that scourge, if indeed it was a scourge which inflicted
     the injuries. His circle of acquaintances in this lonely place was
     surely limited. Let us follow it up in every direction and we can
     hardly fail to come upon the motive, which in turn should lead us to
     the criminal."

     It would have been a pleasant walk across the thyme-scented downs had
     our minds not been poisoned by the tragedy we had witnessed. The
     village of Fulworth lies in a hollow curving in a semicircle round
     the bay. Behind the old-fashioned hamlet several modern houses have
     been built upon the rising ground. It was to one of these that
     Stackhurst guided me.

     "That's The Haven, as Bellamy called it. The one with the corner
     tower and slate roof. Not bad for a man who started with nothing
     but-- By Jove, look at that!"

     The garden gate of The Haven had opened and a man had emerged. There
     was no mistaking that tall, angular, straggling figure. It was Ian
     Murdoch, the mathematician. A moment later we confronted him upon the
     road.

     "Hullo!" said Stackhurst. The man nodded, gave us a sideways glance
     from his curious dark eyes, and would have passed us, but his
     principal pulled him up.

     "What were you doing there?" he asked.

     Murdoch's face flushed with anger. "I am your subordinate, sir, under
     your roof. I am not aware that I owe you any account of my private
     actions."

     Stackhurst's nerves were near the surface after all he had endured.
     Otherwise, perhaps, he would have waited. Now he lost his temper
     completely.

     "In the circumstances your answer is pure impertinence, Mr. Murdoch."

     "Your own question might perhaps come under the same heading."

     "This is not the first time that I have had to overlook your
     insubordinate ways. It will certainly be the last. You will kindly
     make fresh arrangements for your future as speedily as you can."

     "I had intended to do so. I have lost to-day the only person who made
     The Gables habitable."

     He strode off upon his way, while Stackhurst, with angry eyes, stood
     glaring after him. "Is he not an impossible, intolerable man?" he
     cried.

     The one thing that impressed itself forcibly upon my mind was that
     Mr. Ian Murdoch was taking the first chance to open a path of escape
     from the scene of the crime. Suspicion, vague and nebulous, was now
     beginning to take outline in my mind. Perhaps the visit to the
     Bellamys might throw some further light upon the matter. Stackhurst
     pulled himself together, and we went forward to the house.

     Mr. Bellamy proved to be a middle-aged man with a flaming red beard.
     He seemed to be in a very angry mood, and his face was soon as florid
     as his hair.

     "No, sir, I do not desire any particulars. My son here"--indicating a
     powerful young man, with a heavy, sullen face, in the corner of the
     sitting-room--"is of one mind with me that Mr. McPherson's attentions
     to Maud were insulting. Yes, sir, the word 'marriage' was never
     mentioned, and yet there were letters and meetings, and a great deal
     more of which neither of us could approve. She has no mother, and we
     are her only guardians. We are determined--"

     But the words were taken from his mouth by the appearance of the lady
     herself. There was no gainsaying that she would have graced any
     assembly in the world. Who could have imagined that so rare a flower
     would grow from such a root and in such an atmosphere? Women have
     seldom been an attraction to me, for my brain has always governed my
     heart, but I could not look upon her perfect clear-cut face, with all
     the soft freshness of the downlands in her delicate colouring,
     without realizing that no young man would cross her path unscathed.
     Such was the girl who had pushed open the door and stood now,
     wide-eyed and intense, in front of Harold Stackhurst.

     "I know already that Fitzroy is dead," she said. "Do not be afraid to
     tell me the particulars."

     "This other gentleman of yours let us know the news," explained the
     father.

     "There is no reason why my sister should be brought into the matter,"
     growled the younger man.

     The sister turned a sharp, fierce look upon him. "This is my
     business, William. Kindly leave me to manage it in my own way. By all
     accounts there has been a crime committed. If I can help to show who
     did it, it is the least I can do for him who is gone."

     She listened to a short account from my companion, with a composed
     concentration which showed me that she possessed strong character as
     well as great beauty. Maud Bellamy will always remain in my memory as
     a most complete and remarkable woman. It seems that she already knew
     me by sight, for she turned to me at the end.

     "Bring them to justice, Mr. Holmes. You have my sympathy and my help,
     whoever they may be." It seemed to me that she glanced defiantly at
     her father and brother as she spoke.

     "Thank you," said I. "I value a woman's instinct in such matters. You
     use the word 'they.' You think that more than one was concerned?"

     "I knew Mr. McPherson well enough to be aware that he was a brave and
     a strong man. No single person could ever have inflicted such an
     outrage upon him."

     "Might I have one word with you alone?"

     "I tell you, Maud, not to mix yourself up in the matter," cried her
     father angrily.

     She looked at me helplessly. "What can I do?"

     "The whole world will know the facts presently, so there can be no
     harm if I discuss them here," said I. "I should have preferred
     privacy, but if your father will not allow it he must share the
     deliberations." Then I spoke of the note which had been found in the
     dead man's pocket. "It is sure to be produced at the inquest. May I
     ask you to throw any light upon it that you can?"

     "I see no reason for mystery," she answered. "We were engaged to be
     married, and we only kept it secret because Fitzroy's uncle, who is
     very old and said to be dying, might have disinherited him if he had
     married against his wish. There was no other reason."

     "You could have told us," growled Mr. Bellamy.

     "So I would, father, if you had ever shown sympathy."

     "I object to my girl picking up with men outside her own station."

     "It was your prejudice against him which prevented us from telling
     you. As to this appointment"--she fumbled in her dress and produced a
     crumpled note--"it was in answer to this."

     Dearest [ran the message]:
     The old place on the beach just after sunset on Tuesday. It is the
     only time I can get away.
     F. M.

     "Tuesday was to-day, and I had meant to meet him to-night."

     I turned over the paper. "This never came by post. How did you get
     it?"

     "I would rather not answer that question. It has really nothing to do
     with the matter which you are investigating. But anything which bears
     upon that I will most freely answer."

     She was as good as her word, but there was nothing which was helpful
     in our investigation. She had no reason to think that her fiance had
     any hidden enemy, but she admitted that she had had several warm
     admirers.

     "May I ask if Mr. Ian Murdoch was one of them?"

     She blushed and seemed confused.

     "There was a time when I thought he was. But that was all changed
     when he understood the relations between Fitzroy and myself."

     Again the shadow round this strange man seemed to me to be taking
     more definite shape. His record must be examined. His rooms must be
     privately searched. Stackhurst was a willing collaborator, for in his
     mind also suspicions were forming. We returned from our visit to The
     Haven with the hope that one free end of this tangled skein was
     already in our hands.

     A week passed. The inquest had thrown no light upon the matter and
     had been adjourned for further evidence. Stackhurst had made discreet
     inquiry about his subordinate, and there had been a superficial
     search of his room, but without result. Personally, I had gone over
     the whole ground again, both physically and mentally, but with no new
     conclusions. In all my chronicles the reader will find no case which
     brought me so completely to the limit of my powers. Even my
     imagination could conceive no solution to the mystery. And then there
     came the incident of the dog.

     It was my old housekeeper who heard of it first by that strange
     wireless by which such people collect the news of the countryside.

     "Sad story this, sir, about Mr. McPherson's dog," said she one
     evening.

     I do not encourage such conversations, but the words arrested my
     attention.

     "What of Mr. McPherson's dog?"

     "Dead, sir. Died of grief for its master."

     "Who told you this?"

     "Why, sir, everyone is talking of it. It took on terrible, and has
     eaten nothing for a week. Then to-day two of the young gentlemen from
     The Gables found it dead--down on the beach, sir, at the very place
     where its master met his end."

     "At the very place." The words stood out clear in my memory. Some dim
     perception that the matter was vital rose in my mind. That the dog
     should die was after the beautiful, faithful nature of dogs. But "in
     the very place"! Why should this lonely beach be fatal to it? Was it
     possible that it also had been sacrificed to some revengeful feud?
     Was it possible--? Yes, the perception was dim, but already something
     was building up in my mind. In a few minutes I was on my way to The
     Gables, where I found Stackhurst in his study. At my request he sent
     for Sudbury and Blount, the two students who had found the dog.

     "Yes, it lay on the very edge of the pool," said one of them. "It
     must have followed the trail of its dead master."

     I saw the faithful little creature, an Airedale terrier, laid out
     upon the mat in the hall. The body was stiff and rigid, the eyes
     projecting, and the limbs contorted. There was agony in every line of
     it.

     From The Gables I walked down to the bathing-pool. The sun had sunk
     and the shadow of the great cliff lay black across the water, which
     glimmered dully like a sheet of lead. The place was deserted and
     there was no sign of life save for two sea-birds circling and
     screaming overhead. In the fading light I could dimly make out the
     little dog's spoor upon the sand round the very rock on which his
     master's towel had been laid. For a long time I stood in deep
     meditation while the shadows grew darker around me. My mind was
     filled with racing thoughts. You have known what it was to be in a
     nightmare in which you feel that there is some all-important thing
     for which you search and which you know is there, though it remains
     forever just beyond your reach. That was how I felt that evening as I
     stood alone by that place of death. Then at last I turned and walked
     slowly homeward.

     I had just reached the top of the path when it came to me. Like a
     flash, I remembered the thing for which I had so eagerly and vainly
     grasped. You will know, or Watson has written in vain, that I hold a
     vast store of out-of-the-way knowledge without scientific system, but
     very available for the needs of my work. My mind is like a crowded
     box-room with packets of all sorts stowed away therein--so many that
     I may well have but a vague perception of what was there. I had known
     that there was something which might bear upon this matter. It was
     still vague, but at least I knew how I could make it clear. It was
     monstrous, incredible, and yet it was always a possibility. I would
     test it to the full.

     There is a great garret in my little house which is stuffed with
     books. It was into this that I plunged and rummaged for an hour. At
     the end of that time I emerged with a little chocolate and silver
     volume. Eagerly I turned up the chapter of which I had a dim
     remembrance. Yes, it was indeed a far-fetched and unlikely
     proposition, and yet I could not be at rest until I had made sure if
     it might, indeed, be so. It was late when I retired, with my mind
     eagerly awaiting the work of the morrow.

     But that work met with an annoying interruption. I had hardly
     swallowed my early cup of tea and was starting for the beach when I
     had a call from Inspector Bardle of the Sussex Constabulary--a
     steady, solid, bovine man with thoughtful eyes, which looked at me
     now with a very troubled expression.

     "I know your immense experience, sir," said he. "This is quite
     unofficial, of course, and need go no farther. But I am fairly up
     against it in this McPherson case. The question is, shall I make an
     arrest, or shall I not?"

     "Meaning Mr. Ian Murdoch?"

     "Yes, sir. There is really no one else when you come to think of it.
     That's the advantage of this solitude. We narrow it down to a very
     small compass. If he did not do it, then who did?"

     "What have you against him?"

     He had gleaned along the same furrows as I had. There was Murdoch's
     character and the mystery which seemed to hang round the man. His
     furious bursts of temper, as shown in the incident of the dog. The
     fact that he had quarrelled with McPherson in the past, and that
     there was some reason to think that he might have resented his
     attentions to Miss Bellamy. He had all my points, but no fresh ones,
     save that Murdoch seemed to be making every preparation for
     departure.

     "What would my position be if I let him slip away with all this
     evidence against him?" The burly, phlegmatic man was sorely troubled
     in his mind.

     "Consider," I said, "all the essential gaps in your case. On the
     morning of the crime he can surely prove an alibi. He had been with
     his scholars till the last moment, and within a few minutes of
     McPherson's appearance he came upon us from behind. Then bear in mind
     the absolute impossibility that he could single-handed have inflicted
     this outrage upon a man quite as strong as himself. Finally, there is
     this question of the instrument with which these injuries were
     inflicted."

     "What could it be but a scourge or flexible whip of some sort?"

     "Have you examined the marks?" I asked.

     "I have seen them. So has the doctor."

     "But I have examined them very carefully with a lens. They have
     peculiarities."

     "What are they, Mr. Holmes?"

     I stepped to my bureau and brought out an enlarged photograph. "This
     is my method in such cases," I explained.

     "You certainly do things thoroughly, Mr. Holmes."

     "I should hardly be what I am if I did not. Now let us consider this
     weal which extends round the right shoulder. Do you observe nothing
     remarkable?"

     "I can't say I do."

     "Surely it is evident that it is unequal in its intensity. There is a
     dot of extravasated blood here, and another there. There are similar
     indications in this other weal down here. What can that mean?"

     "I have no idea. Have you?"

     "Perhaps I have. Perhaps I haven't. I may be able to say more soon.
     Anything which will define what made that mark will bring us a long
     way towards the criminal."

     "It is, of course, an absurd idea," said the policeman, "but if a
     red-hot net of wire had been laid across the back, then these better
     marked points would represent where the meshes crossed each other."

     "A most ingenious comparison. Or shall we say a very stiff
     cat-o'-nine-tails with small hard knots upon it?"

     "By Jove, Mr. Holmes, I think you have hit it."

     "Or there may be some very different cause, Mr. Bardle. But your case
     is far too weak for an arrest. Besides, we have those last words--the
     'Lion's Mane.'"

     "I have wondered whether Ian--"

     "Yes, I have considered that. If the second word had borne any
     resemblance to Murdoch--but it did not. He gave it almost in a
     shriek. I am sure that it was 'Mane.'"

     "Have you no alternative, Mr. Holmes?"

     "Perhaps I have. But I do not care to discuss it until there is
     something more solid to discuss."

     "And when will that be?"

     "In an hour--possibly less."

     The inspector rubbed his chin and looked at me with dubious eyes.

     "I wish I could see what was in your mind, Mr. Holmes. Perhaps it's
     those fishing-boats."

     "No, no, they were too far out."

     "Well, then, is it Bellamy and that big son of his? They were not too
     sweet upon Mr. McPherson. Could they have done him a mischief?"

     "No, no, you won't draw me until I am ready," said I with a smile.
     "Now, Inspector, we each have our own work to do. Perhaps if you were
     to meet me here at midday--"

     So far we had got when there came the tremendous interruption which
     was the beginning of the end.

     My outer door was flung open, there were blundering footsteps in the
     passage, and Ian Murdoch staggered into the room, pallid,
     dishevelled, his clothes in wild disorder, clawing with his bony
     hands at the furniture to hold himself erect. "Brandy! Brandy!" he
     gasped, and fell groaning upon the sofa.

     He was not alone. Behind him came Stackhurst, hatless and panting,
     almost as distrait as his companion.

     "Yes, yes, brandy!" he cried. "The man is at his last gasp. It was
     all I could do to bring him here. He fainted twice upon the way."

     Half a tumbler of the raw spirit brought about a wondrous change. He
     pushed himself up on one arm and swung his coat from his shoulders.
     "For God's sake, oil, opium, morphia!" he cried. "Anything to ease
     this infernal agony!"

     The inspector and I cried out at the sight. There, crisscrossed upon
     the man's naked shoulder, was the same strange reticulated pattern of
     red, inflamed lines which had been the death-mark of Fitzroy
     McPherson.

     The pain was evidently terrible and was more than local, for the
     sufferer's breathing would stop for a time, his face would turn
     black, and then with loud gasps he would clap his hand to his heart,
     while his brow dropped beads of sweat. At any moment he might die.
     More and more brandy was poured down his throat, each fresh dose
     bringing him back to life. Pads of cotton-wool soaked in salad-oil
     seemed to take the agony from the strange wounds. At last his head
     fell heavily upon the cushion. Exhausted Nature had taken refuge in
     its last storehouse of vitality. It was half a sleep and half a
     faint, but at least it was ease from pain.

     To question him had been impossible, but the moment we were assured
     of his condition Stackhurst turned upon me.

     "My God!" he cried, "what is it, Holmes? What is it?"

     "Where did you find him?"

     "Down on the beach. Exactly where poor McPherson met his end. If this
     man's heart had been weak as McPherson's was, he would not be here
     now. More than once I thought he was gone as I brought him up. It was
     too far to The Gables, so I made for you."

     "Did you see him on the beach?"

     "I was walking on the cliff when I heard his cry. He was at the edge
     of the water, reeling about like a drunken man. I ran down, threw
     some clothes about him, and brought him up. For heaven's sake,
     Holmes, use all the powers you have and spare no pains to lift the
     curse from this place, for life is becoming unendurable. Can you,
     with all your world-wide reputation, do nothing for us?"

     "I think I can, Stackhurst. Come with me now! And you, Inspector,
     come along! We will see if we cannot deliver this murderer into your
     hands."

     Leaving the unconscious man in the charge of my housekeeper, we all
     three went down to the deadly lagoon. On the shingle there was piled
     a little heap of towels and clothes left by the stricken man. Slowly
     I walked round the edge of the water, my comrades in Indian file
     behind me. Most of the pool was quite shallow, but under the cliff
     where the beach was hollowed out it was four or five feet deep. It
     was to this part that a swimmer would naturally go, for it formed a
     beautiful pellucid green pool as clear as crystal. A line of rocks
     lay above it at the base of the cliff, and along this I led the way,
     peering eagerly into the depths beneath me. I had reached the deepest
     and stillest pool when my eyes caught that for which they were
     searching, and I burst into a shout of triumph.

     "Cyanea!" I cried. "Cyanea! Behold the Lion's Mane!"

     The strange object at which I pointed did indeed look like a tangled
     mass torn from the mane of a lion. It lay upon a rocky shelf some
     three feet under the water, a curious waving, vibrating, hairy
     creature with streaks of silver among its yellow tresses. It pulsated
     with a slow, heavy dilation and contraction.

     "It has done mischief enough. Its day is over!" I cried. "Help me,
     Stackhurst! Let us end the murderer forever."

     There was a big boulder just above the ledge, and we pushed it until
     it fell with a tremendous splash into the water. When the ripples had
     cleared we saw that it had settled upon the ledge below. One flapping
     edge of yellow membrane showed that our victim was beneath it. A
     thick oily scum oozed out from below the stone and stained the water
     round, rising slowly to the surface.

     "Well, this gets me!" cried the inspector. "What was it, Mr. Holmes?
     I'm born and bred in these parts, but I never saw such a thing. It
     don't belong to Sussex."

     "Just as well for Sussex," I remarked. "It may have been the
     southwest gale that brought it up. Come back to my house, both of
     you, and I will give you the terrible experience of one who has good
     reason to remember his own meeting with the same peril of the seas."

     When we reached my study we found that Murdoch was so far recovered
     that he could sit up. He was dazed in mind, and every now and then
     was shaken by a paroxysm of pain. In broken words he explained that
     he had no notion what had occurred to him, save that terrific pangs
     had suddenly shot through him, and that it had taken all his
     fortitude to reach the bank.

     "Here is a book," I said, taking up the little volume, "which first
     brought light into what might have been forever dark. It is Out of
     Doors, by the famous observer, J. G. Wood. Wood himself very nearly
     perished from contact with this vile creature, so he wrote with a
     very full knowledge. Cyanea capillata is the miscreant's full name,
     and he can be as dangerous to life as, and far more painful than, the
     bite of the cobra. Let me briefly give this extract.

     "If the bather should see a loose roundish mass of tawny membranes
     and fibres, something like very large handfuls of lion's mane and
     silver paper, let him beware, for this is the fearful stinger, Cyanea
     capillata.

     Could our sinister acquaintance be more clearly described?

     "He goes on to tell of his own encounter with one when swimming off
     the coast of Kent. He found that the creature radiated almost
     invisible filaments to the distance of fifty feet, and that anyone
     within that circumference from the deadly centre was in danger of
     death. Even at a distance the effect upon Wood was almost fatal.

     "The multitudinous threads caused light scarlet lines upon the skin
     which on closer examination resolved into minute dots or pustules,
     each dot charged as it were with a red-hot needle making its way
     through the nerves.

     "The local pain was, as he explains, the least part of the exquisite
     torment.

     "Pangs shot through the chest, causing me to fall as if struck by a
     bullet. The pulsation would cease, and then the heart would give six
     or seven leaps as if it would force its way through the chest.

     "It nearly killed him, although he had only been exposed to it in the
     disturbed ocean and not in the narrow calm waters of a bathing-pool.
     He says that he could hardly recognize himself afterwards, so white,
     wrinkled and shrivelled was his face. He gulped down brandy, a whole
     bottleful, and it seems to have saved his life. There is the book,
     Inspector. I leave it with you, and you cannot doubt that it contains
     a full explanation of the tragedy of poor McPherson."

     "And incidentally exonerates me," remarked Ian Murdoch with a wry
     smile. "I do not blame you, Inspector, nor you, Mr. Holmes, for your
     suspicions were natural. I feel that on the very eve of my arrest I
     have only cleared myself by sharing the fate of my poor friend."

     "No, Mr. Murdoch. I was already upon the track, and had I been out as
     early as I intended I might well have saved you from this terrific
     experience."

     "But how did you know, Mr. Holmes?"

     "I am an omnivorous reader with a strangely retentive memory for
     trifles. That phrase 'the Lion's Mane' haunted my mind. I knew that I
     had seen it somewhere in an unexpected context. You have seen that it
     does describe the creature. I have no doubt that it was floating on
     the water when McPherson saw it, and that this phrase was the only
     one by which he could convey to us a warning as to the creature which
     had been his death."

     "Then I, at least, am cleared," said Murdoch, rising slowly to his
     feet. "There are one or two words of explanation which I should give,
     for I know the direction in which your inquiries have run. It is true
     that I loved this lady, but from the day when she chose my friend
     McPherson my one desire was to help her to happiness. I was well
     content to stand aside and act as their go-between. Often I carried
     their messages, and it was because I was in their confidence and
     because she was so dear to me that I hastened to tell her of my
     friend's death, lest someone should forestall me in a more sudden and
     heartless manner. She would not tell you, sir, of our relations lest
     you should disapprove and I might suffer. But with your leave I must
     try to get back to The Gables, for my bed will be very welcome."

     Stackhurst held out his hand. "Our nerves have all been at
     concert-pitch," said he. "Forgive what is past, Murdoch. We shall
     understand each other better in the future." They passed out together
     with their arms linked in friendly fashion. The inspector remained,
     staring at me in silence with his ox-like eyes.

     "Well, you've done it!" he cried at last. "I had read of you, but I
     never believed it. It's wonderful!"

     I was forced to shake my head. To accept such praise was to lower
     one's own standards.

     "I was slow at the outset--culpably slow. Had the body been found in
     the water I could hardly have missed it. It was the towel which
     misled me. The poor fellow had never thought to dry himself, and so I
     in turn was led to believe that he had never been in the water. Why,
     then, should the attack of any water creature suggest itself to me?
     That was where I went astray. Well, well, Inspector, I often ventured
     to chaff you gentlemen of the police force, but Cyanea capillata very
     nearly avenged Scotland Yard."



                                    Little Britain
                                 By Washington Irving


What I write is most true...I have a whole booke of cases lying by me
which if I should sette foorth, some grave auntients (within the hearing of
Bow bell) would be out of charity with me.
NASHE.
IN the centre of the great city of London lies a small neighborhood,
consisting of a cluster of narrow streets and courts, of very venerable and
debilitated houses, which goes by the name of LITTLE BRITAIN. Christ
Church School and St. Bartholomew's Hospital bound it on the west;
Smithfield and Long Lane on the north; Aldersgate Street, like an arm of
the sea, divides it from the eastern part of the city; whilst the yawning
gulf of Bull-and-Mouth Street separates it from Butcher Lane, and the
regions of Newgate. Over this little territory, thus bounded and
designated, the great dome of St. Paul's, swelling above the intervening
houses of Paternoster Row, Amen Corner, and Ave Maria Lane, looks
down with an air of motherly protection.
This quarter derives its appellation from having been, in ancient times,
the residence of the Dukes of Brittany. As London increased, however, 
rank and fashion rolled off to the west, and trade, creeping on at their
heels, took possession of their deserted abodes. For some time Little
Britain became the great mart of learning, and was peopled by the busy
and prolific race of booksellers; these also gradually deserted it, and,
emigrating beyond the great strait of Newgate Street, settled down in
Paternoster Row and St. Paul's Churchyard, where they continue to
increase and multiply even at the present day.
But though thus falling into decline, Little Britain still bears traces of its
former splendor. There are several houses ready to tumble down, the
fronts of which are magnificently enriched with old oaken carvings of
hideous faces, unknown birds, beasts, and fishes; and fruits and flowers
which it would perplex a naturalist to classify. There are also, in
Aldersgate Street, certain remains of what were once spacious and lordly
family mansions, but which have in latter days been subdivided into
several tenements. Here may often be found the family of a petty
tradesman, with its trumpery furniture, burrowing among the relics of
antiquated finery, in great, rambling, time- stained apartments, with
fretted ceilings, gilded cornices, and enormous marble fireplaces. The
lanes and courts also contain many smaller houses, not on so grand a
scale, but, like your small ancient gentry, sturdily maintaining their claims
to equal antiquity. These have their gable ends to the street; great bowwindows, with diamond panes set in lead, grotesque carvings, and low
arched door-ways.
In this most venerable and sheltered little nest have I passed several
quiet years of existence, comfortably lodged in the second floor of one of
the smallest but oldest edifices. My sitting-room is an old wainscoted
chamber, with small panels, and set off with a miscellaneous array of
furniture. I have a particular respect for three or four high-backed clawfooted chairs, covered with tarnished brocade, which bear the marks of
having seen better days, and have doubtless figured in some of the old
palaces of Little Britain. They seem to me to keep together, and to look
down with sovereign contempt upon their leathern-bottomed neighbors:
as I have seen decayed gentry carry a high head among the plebeian
society with which they were reduced to associate. The whole front of my
sitting- room is taken up with a bow-window, on the panes of which are
recorded the names of previous occupants for many generations, mingled
with scraps of very indifferent gentlemanlike poetry, written in characters
which I can scarcely decipher, and which extol the charms of many a
beauty of Little Britain who has long, long since bloomed, faded, and
passed away. As I am an idle personage, with no apparent occupation,
and pay my bill regularly every week, I am looked upon as the only
independent gentleman of the neighborhood; and, being curious to learn
the internal state of a community so apparently shut up within itself, I
have managed to work my way into all the concerns and secrets of the
place.
Little Britain may truly be called the heart's core of the city; the
stronghold of true John Bullism. It is a fragment of London as it was in its
better days, with its antiquated folks and fashions. Here flourish in great
preservation many of the holiday games and customs of yore. The
inhabitants most religiously eat pancakes on Shrove Tuesday, hot-crossbuns on Good Friday, and roast goose at Michaelmas; they send loveletters on Valentine's Day, burn the pope on the fifth of November, and 
kiss all the girls under the mistletoe at Christmas. Roast beef and plum
pudding are also held in superstitious veneration, and port and sherry
maintain their grounds as the only true English wines; all others being
considered vile, outlandish beverages.
Little Britain has its long catalogue of city wonders, which its inhabitants
consider the wonders of the world: such as the great bell of St. Paul's,
which sours all the beer when it tolls; the figures that strike the hours at
St. Dunstan's clock; the Monument; the lions in the Tower; and the
wooden giants in Guildhall. They still believe in dreams and fortunetelling, and an old woman that lives in Bull-and-Mouth Street makes a
tolerable subsistence by detecting stolen goods, and promising the girls
good husbands. They are apt to be rendered uncomfortable by comets
and eclipses; and if a dog howls dolefully at night, it is looked upon as a
sure sign of a death in the place. There are even many ghost stories
current, particularly concerning the old mansion-houses; in several of
which it is said strange sights are sometimes seen. Lords and ladies, the
former in full bottomed wigs, hanging sleeves, and swords, the latter in
lappets, stays, hoops and brocade, have been seen walking up and down
the great waste chambers, on moonlight nights; and are supposed to be
the shades of the ancient proprietors in their court-dresses.
Little Britain has likewise its sages and great men. One of the most
important of the former is a tall, dry old gentleman, of the name of
Skryme, who keeps a small apothecary's shop. He has a cadaverous
countenance, full of cavities and projections; with a brown circle round
each eye, like a pair of horned spectacles. He is much thought of by the
old women, who consider him a kind of conjurer, because he has two of
three stuffed alligators hanging up in his shop, and several snakes in
bottles. He is a great reader of almanacs and newspapers, and is much
given to pore over alarming accounts of plots, conspiracies, fires,
earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions; which last phenomena he considers
as signs of the times. He has always some dismal tale of the kind to deal
out to his customers, with their doses; and thus at the same time puts
both soul and body into an uproar. He is a great believer in omens and
predictions; and has the prophecies of Robert Nixon and Mother Shipton
by heart. No man can make so much out of an eclipse, or even an
unusually dark day; and he shook the tail of the last comet over the
heads of his customers and disciples until they were nearly frightened out
of their wits. He has lately got hold of a popular legend or prophecy, on
which he has been unusually eloquent. There has been a saying current 
among the ancient sibyls, who treasure up these things, that when the
grasshopper on the top of the Exchange shook hands with the dragon on
the top of Bow Church Steeple, fearful events would take place. This
strange conjunction, it seems, has as strangely come to pass. The same
architect has been engaged lately on the repairs of the cupola of the
Exchange, and the steeple of Bow church; and, fearful to relate, the
dragon and the grasshopper actually lie, cheek by jole, in the yard of his 
workshop.
"Others," as Mr. Skryme is accustomed to say, "may go star- gazing, and
look for conjunctions in the heavens, but here is a conjunction on the
earth, near at home, and under our own eyes, which surpasses all the
signs and calculations of astrologers." Since these portentous
weathercocks have thus laid their heads together, wonderful events had 
 already occurred. The good old king, notwithstanding that he had lived
eighty-two years, had all at once given up the ghost; another king had 
mounted the throne; a royal duke had died suddenly,--another, in France,
had been murdered; there had been radical meetings in all parts of the
kingdom; the bloody scenes at Manchester; the great plot of Cato Street;
and above all, the queen had returned to England! All these sinister
events are recounted by Mr. Skryme, with a mysterious look, and a
dismal shake of the head; and being taken with his drugs, and associated
in the minds of his auditors with stuffed sea-monsters, bottled serpents,
and his own visage, which is a title-page of tribulation, they have spread
great gloom through the minds of the people of Little Britain. They shake
their heads whenever they go by Bow Church, and observe, that they
never expected any good to come of taking down that steeple, which in
old times told nothing but glad tidings, as the history of Whittington and
his Cat bears witness.
The rival oracle of Little Britain is a substantial cheesemonger, who lives
in a fragment of one of the old family mansions, and is as magnificently
lodged as a round-bellied mite in the midst of one of his own Cheshires.
Indeed, he is a man of no little standing and importance; and his renown
extends through Huggin Lane, and Lad Lane, and even unto
Aldermanbury. His opinion is very much taken in affairs of state, having
 read the Sunday papers for the last half century, together with the
"Gentleman's Magazine," Rapin's "History of England," and the "Naval
Chronicle." His head is stored with invaluable maxims which have borne
the test of time and use for centuries. It is his firm opinion that "it is a
moral impossible," so long as England is true to herself, that anything can
shake her; and he has much to say on the subject of the national debt,
which, somehow or other, he proves to be a great national bulwark and
blessing. He passed the greater part of his life in the purlieus of Little
Britain, until of late years, when, having become rich, and grown into the
dignity of a Sunday cane, he begins to take his pleasure and see the
world. He has therefore made several excursions to Hampstead,
Highgate, and other neighboring towns, where he has passed whole
afternoons in looking back upon the metropolis through a telescope, and
endeavoring to descry the steeple of St. Bartholomew's. Not a stagecoachman of Bull-and-Mouth Street but touches his hat as he passes; and
he is considered quite a patron at the coach-office of the Goose and
Gridiron, St. Paul's churchyard. His family have been very urgent for him
to make an expedition to Margate, but he has great doubts of those new
gimcracks, the steamboats, and indeed thinks himself too advanced in life
to undertake sea-voyages.
Little Britain has occasionally its factions and divisions, and party spirit
ran very high at one time in consequence of two rival "Burial Societies"
being set up in the place. One held its meeting at the Swan and Horse
Shoe, and was patronized by the cheesemonger; the other at the Cock
and Crown, under the auspices of the apothecary; it is needless to say
that the latter was the most flourishing. I have passed an evening or two
at each, and have acquired much valuable information, as to the best
mode of being buried, the comparative merits of churchyards, together
with divers hints on the subject of patent-iron coffins. I have heard the
question discussed in all its bearings as to the legality of prohibiting the
latter on account of their durability. The feuds occasioned by these
societies have happily died of late; but they were for a long time
prevailing themes of controversy, the people of Little Britain being
extremely solicitous of funereal honors and of lying comfortably in their
graves.
Besides these two funeral societies there is a third of quite a different
cast, which tends to throw the sunshine of good- humor over the whole
neighborhood. It meets once a week at a little old-fashioned house, kept
by a jolly publican of the name of Wagstaff, and bearing for insignia a
resplendent half- moon, with a most seductive bunch of grapes. The old
edifice is covered with inscriptions to catch the eye of the thirsty
wayfarer, such as "Truman, Hanbury, and Co.'s Entire," "Wine, Rum, and
Brandy Vaults," "Old Tom, Rum and Compounds, etc." This indeed has
been a temple of Bacchus and Momus from time immemorial. It has 

always been in the family of the Wagstaffs, so that its history is tolerably
preserved by the present landlord. It was much frequented by the
gallants and cavalieros of the reign of Elizabeth, and was looked into now
and then by the wits of Charles the Second's day. But what Wagstaff
principally prides himself upon is, that Henry the Eighth, in one of his 
nocturnal rambles, broke the head of one of his ancestors with his famous
walking-staff. This, however, is considered as a rather dubious and
vainglorious boast of the landlord.
The club which now holds its weekly sessions here goes by the name of
"The Roaring Lads of Little Britain." They abound in old catches, glees,
and choice stories, that are traditional in the place, and not to be met
with in any other part of the metropolis. There is a madcap undertaker
who is inimitable at a merry song; but the life of the club, and indeed the
prime wit of Little Britain, is bully Wagstaff himself. His ancestors were all
wags before him, and he has inherited with the inn a large stock of songs
and jokes, which go with it from generation to generation as heirlooms.
He is a dapper little fellow, with bandy legs and pot belly, a red face, with
a moist, merry eye, and a little shock of gray hair behind. At the opening
of every club night he is called in to sing his "Confession of Faith," which
is the famous old drinking trowl from "Gammer Gurton's Needle." He
sings it, to be sure, with many variations, as he received it from his
father's lips; for it has been a standing favorite at the Half-Moon and
Bunch of Grapes ever since it was written; nay, he affirms that his
predecessors have often had the honor of singing it before the nobility
and gentry at Christmas mummeries, when Little Britain was in all its
glory.
It would do one's heart good to hear, on a club night, the shouts of
merriment, the snatches of song, and now and then the choral bursts of
half a dozen discordant voices, which issue from this jovial mansion. At
such times the street is lined with listeners, who enjoy a delight equal to
that of gazing into a confectioner's window, or snuffing up the steams of a
cookshop.
There are two annual events which produce great stir and sensation in
Little Britain; these are St. Bartholomew's Fair, and the Lord Mayor's Day.
During the time of the fair, which is held in the adjoining regions of
Smithfield, there is nothing going on but gossiping and gadding about.
The late quiet streets of Little Britain are overrun with an irruption of
strange figures and faces; every tavern is a scene of rout and revel. The
fiddle and the song are heard from the tap-room, morning, noon, and
night; and at each window may be seen some group of boon companions,
with half-shut eyes, hats on one side, pipe in mouth, and tankard in hand, 
fondling, and prosing, and singing maudlin songs over their liquor. Even
the sober decorum of private families, which I must say is rigidly kept up
at other times among my neighbors, is no proof against this Saturnalia.
There is no such thing as keeping maid-servants within doors. Their
brains are absolutely set madding with Punch and the Puppet Show; the
Flying Horses; Signior Polito; the Fire-Eater; the celebrated Mr. Paap; and
the Irish Giant. The children, too, lavish all their holiday money in toys
and gilt gingerbread, and fill the house with the Lilliputian din of drums,
trumpets, and penny whistles.
But the Lord mayor's Day is the great anniversary. The Lord Mayor is
looked up to by the inhabitants of Little Britain as the greatest potentate
upon earth; his gilt coach with six horses as the summit of human 
splendor; and his procession, with all the Sheriffs and Aldermen in his 
train, as the grandest of earthly pageants. How they exult in the idea that
the King himself dare not enter the city without first knocking at the gate
of Temple Bar, and asking permission of the Lord Mayor: for if he did,
heaven and earth! there is no knowing what might be the consequence.
The man in armor, who rides before the Lord mayor, and is the city
champion, has orders to cut down everybody that offends against the
dignity of the city; and then there is the little man with a velvet porringer
on his head, who sits at the window of the state-coach, and holds the city
sword, as long as a pike-staff--Odd's blood! If he once draws that sword,
Majesty itself is not safe!
Under the protection of this mighty potentate, therefore, the good people
of Little Britain sleep in peace. Temple Bar is an effectual barrier against
all interior foes; and as to foreign invasion, the Lord Mayor has but to
throw himself into the Tower, call in the trainbands, and put the standing
army of Beef-eaters under arms, and he may bid defiance to the world!
Thus wrapped up in its own concerns, its own habits, and its own
opinions, Little Britain has long flourished as a sound heart to this great
fungous metropolis. I have pleased myself with considering it as a chosen
spot, where the principles of sturdy John Bullism were garnered up, like
seed corn, to renew the national character, when it had run to waste and
degeneracy. I have rejoiced also in the general spirit of harmony that
prevailed throughout it; for though there might now and then be a few
clashes of opinion between the adherents of the cheesemonger and the
apothecary, and an occasional feud between the burial societies, yet
these were but transient clouds, and soon passed away. The neighbors
met with good-will, parted with a shake of the hand, and never abused
each other except behind their backs.
I could give rare descriptions of snug junketing parties at which I have
been present; where we played at All-fours, Pope- Joan, Tome-cometickle-me, and other choice old games; and where we sometimes had a
good old English country dance to the tune of Sir Roger de Coverley. Once
a year, also, the neighbors would gather together, and go on a gypsy
party to Epping Forest. It would have done any man's heart good to see
the merriment that took place here as we banqueted on the grass under
the trees. How we made the woods ring with bursts of laughter at the
songs of little Wagstaff and the merry undertaker! After dinner, too, the
young folks would play at blind-man's-buff and hide-and-seek; and it was
amusing to see them tangled among the briers, and to hear a fine
romping girl now and then squeak from among the bushes. The elder
folks would gather round the cheesemonger and the apothecary to hear
them talk politics; for they generally brought out a newspaper in their
pockets, to pass away time in the country. They would now and then, to
be sure, get a little warm in argument; but their disputes were always
adjusted by reference to a worthy old umbrellamaker, in a double chin,
who, never exactly comprehending the subject, managed somehow or
other to decide in favor of both parties.
All empires, however, says some philosopher or historian, are doomed to
changes and revolutions. Luxury and innovation creep in; factions arise;
and families now and then spring up, whose ambition and intrigues throw
the whole system into confusion. Thus in latter days has the tranquillity of
Little Britain been grievously disturbed, and its golden simplicity of
manners threatened with total subversion by the aspiring family of a
retired butcher.
The family of the Lambs had long been among the most thriving and
popular in the neighborhood; the Miss Lambs were the belles of Little
Britain, and everybody was pleased when Old Lamb had made money
enough to shut up shop, and put his name on a brass plate on his door.
In an evil hour, however, one of the Miss Lambs had the honor of being a
lady in attendance on the Lady Mayoress, at her grand annual ball, on
which occasion she wore three towering ostrich feathers on her head. The
family never got over it; they were immediately smitten with a passion for
high life; set up a one-horse carriage, put a bit of gold lace round the
errand boy's hat, and have been the talk and detestation of the whole
neighborhood ever since. They could no longer be induced to play at
Pope-Joan or blind- man's-buff; they could endure no dances but
quadrilles, which nobody had ever heard of in Little Britain; and they took
to reading novels, talking bad French, and playing upon the piano. Their
brother, too, who had been articled to an attorney, set up for a dandy and
a critic, characters hitherto unknown in these parts; and he confounded
the worthy folks exceedingly by talking about Kean, the opera, and the
"Edinburgh Review."
What was still worse, the Lambs gave a grand ball, to which they
neglected to invite any of their old neighbors; but they had a great deal of
genteel company from Theobald's Road, Red- Lion Square, and other
parts towards the west. There were several beaux of their brother's
acquaintance from Gray's Inn Lane and Hatton Garden; and not less than
three Aldermen's ladies with their daughters. This was not to be forgotten
or forgiven. All Little Britain was in an uproar with the smacking of whips,
the lashing of miserable horses, and the rattling and the jingling of
hackney coaches. The gossips of the neighborhood might be seen popping
their nightcaps out at every window, watching the crazy vehicles rumble
by; and there was a knot of virulent old cronies, that kept a lookout from
a house just opposite the retired butcher's, and scanned and criticised
every one that knocked at the door.
This dance was a cause of almost open war, and the whole neighborhood
declared they would have nothing more to say to the Lambs. It is true
that Mrs. Lamb, when she had no engagements with her quality
acquaintance, would give little humdrum tea-junketings to some of her
old cronies, "quite," as she would say, "in a friendly way;" and it is
equally true that her invitations were always accepted, in spite of all
previous vows to the contrary. Nay, the good ladies would sit and be
delighted with the music of the Miss Lambs, who would condescend to
strum an Irish melody for them on the piano; and they would listen with
wonderful interest to Mrs. Lamb's anecdotes of Alderman Plunket's family,
of Portsokenward, and the Miss Timberlakes, the rich heiresses of
Crutched-Friars; but then they relieved their consciences, and averted the
reproaches of their confederates, by canvassing at the next gossiping
convocation everything that had passed, and pulling the Lambs and their
rout all to pieces.
The only one of the family that could not be made fashionable was the
retired butcher himself. Honest Lamb, in spite of the meekness of his
name, was a rough, hearty old fellow, with the voice of a lion, a head of
black hair like a shoe- brush, and a broad face mottled like his own beef.
It was in vain that the daughters always spoke of him as "the old
gentleman," addressed him as "papa," in tones of infinite softness, and
endeavored to coax him into a dressing-gown and slippers, and other
gentlemanly habits. Do what they might, there was no keeping down the
butcher. His sturdy nature would break through all their glozings. He had 
a hearty vulgar good-humor that was irrepressible. His very jokes made
his sensitive daughters shudder; and he persisted in wearing his blue
cotton coat of a morning, dining at two o'clock, and having a "bit of
sausage with his tea."
He was doomed, however, to share the unpopularity of his family. He
found his old comrades gradually growing cold and civil to him; no longer
laughing at his jokes; and now and then throwing out a fling at "some
people," and a hint about "quality binding." This both nettled and
perplexed the honest butcher; and his wife and daughters, with the
consummate policy of the shrewder sex, taking advantage of the
circumstance, at length prevailed upon him to give up his afternoon's pipe
and tankard at Wagstaff's; to sit after dinner by himself, and take his pint
of port--a liquor he detested--and to nod in his chair in solitary and
dismal gentility.
The Miss Lambs might now be seen flaunting along the streets in French
bonnets, with unknown beaux; and talking and laughing so loud that it
distressed the nerves of every good lady within hearing. They even went
so far as to attempt patronage, and actually induced a French dancingmaster to set up in the neighborhood; but the worthy folks of Little Britain
took fire at it, and did so persecute the poor Gaul that he was fain to pack
up fiddle and dancing-pumps, and decamp with such precipitation that he
absolutely forgot to pay for his lodgings.
I had flattered myself, at first, with the idea that all this fiery indignation
on the part of the community was merely the overflowing of their zeal for
good old English manners, and their horror of innovation; and I
applauded the silent contempt they were so vociferous in expressing, for
upstart pride, French fashions, and the Miss Lambs. But I grieve to say
that I soon perceived the infection had taken hold; and that my
neighbors, after condemning, were beginning to follow their example. I
overheard my landlady importuning her husband to let their daughters
have one quarter at French and music, and that they might take a few
lessons in quadrille. I even saw, in the course of a few Sundays, no less
than five French bonnets, precisely like those of the Miss Lambs, parading
about Little Britain.
I still had my hopes that all this folly would gradually die away; that the
Lambs might move out of the neighborhood; might die, or might run
away with attorneys' apprentices; and that quiet and simplicity might be
again restored to the community. But unluckily a rival power arose. An
opulent oilman died, and left a widow with a large jointure and a family of
buxom daughters. The young ladies had long been repining in secret at
the parsimony of a prudent father, which kept down all their elegant
aspirings. Their ambition, being now no longer restrained, broke out into
a blaze, and they openly took the field against the family of the butcher.
It is true that the Lambs, having had the first start, had naturally an
advantage of them in the fashionable career. They could speak a little bad
French, play the piano, dance quadrilles, and had formed high
acquaintances; but the Trotters were not to be distanced. When the
Lambs appeared with two feathers in their hats, the Miss Trotters
mounted four, and of twice as fine colors. If the Lambs gave a dance, the
Trotters were sure not to be behindhand: and though they might not
boast of as good company, yet they had double the number, and were
twice as merry.
The whole community has at length divided itself into fashionable
factions, under the banners of these two families. The old games of PopeJoan and Tom-come-tickle-me are entirely discarded; there is no such
thing as getting up an honest country dance; and on my attempting to
kiss a young lady under the mistletoe last Christmas, I was indignantly
repulsed; the Miss Lambs having pronounced it "shocking vulgar." Bitter
rivalry has also broken out as to the most fashionable part of Little
Britain; the Lambs standing up for the dignity of the Cross-Keys Square,
and the Trotters for the vicinity of St. Bartholomew's.
Thus is this little territory torn by factions and internal dissensions, like
the great empire who name it bears; and what will be the result would
puzzle the apothecary himself, with all his talent at prognostics, to
determine; though I apprehend that it will terminate in the total downfall
of genuine John Bullism.
The immediate effects are extremely unpleasant to me. Being a single
man, and, as I observed before, rather an idle good-for-nothing
personage, I have been considered the only gentleman by profession in
the place. I stand therefore in high favor with both parties, and have to
hear all their cabinet councils and mutual backbitings. As I am too civil
not to agree with the ladies on all occasions, I have committed myself
most horribly with both parties, by abusing their opponents. I might
manage to reconcile this to my conscience, which is a truly
accommodating one, but I cannot to my apprehension--if the Lambs and
Trotters ever come to a reconciliation, and compare notes, I am ruined!
I have determined, therefore, to beat a retreat in time, and am actually
looking out for some other nest in this great city, where old English
manners are still kept up; where French is neither eaten, drunk, danced,
nor spoken; and where there are no fashionable families of retired
tradesmen. This found, I will, like a veteran rat, hasten away before I
have an old house about my ears; bid a long, though a sorrowful, adieu to
my present abode, and leave the rival factions of the Lambs and the
Trotters to divide the distracted empire of LITTLE BRITAIN.
THE END.






                               A STUDY IN SCARLET

                               Arthur Conan Doyle







                                Table of contents

         Part I
        Mr. Sherlock Holmes
        The Science Of Deduction
        The Lauriston Garden Mystery
        What John Rance Had To Tell
        Our Advertisement Brings A Visitor
        Tobias Gregson Shows What He Can Do
        Light In The Darkness

         Part II
        On The Great Alkali Plain
        The Flower Of Utah
        John Ferrier Talks With The Prophet
        A Flight For Life
        The Avenging Angels
        A Continuation Of The Reminiscences Of John Watson, M.D.
        The Conclusion



















                                      PART I

                   (Being a reprint from the reminiscences of
                              John H. Watson, M.D.,
                      late of the Army Medical Department.)





          CHAPTER I
          Mr. Sherlock Holmes


     In the year 1878 I took my degree of Doctor of Medicine of the
     University of London, and proceeded to Netley to go through the
     course prescribed for surgeons in the army. Having completed my
     studies there, I was duly attached to the Fifth Northumberland
     Fusiliers as Assistant Surgeon. The regiment was stationed in India
     at the time, and before I could join it, the second Afghan war had
     broken out. On landing at Bombay, I learned that my corps had
     advanced through the passes, and was already deep in the enemy's
     country. I followed, however, with many other officers who were in
     the same situation as myself, and succeeded in reaching Candahar in
     safety, where I found my regiment, and at once entered upon my new
     duties.

     The campaign brought honours and promotion to many, but for me it had
     nothing but misfortune and disaster. I was removed from my brigade
     and attached to the Berkshires, with whom I served at the fatal
     battle of Maiwand. There I was struck on the shoulder by a Jezail
     bullet, which shattered the bone and grazed the subclavian artery. I
     should have fallen into the hands of the murderous Ghazis had it not
     been for the devotion and courage shown by Murray, my orderly, who
     threw me across a pack-horse, and succeeded in bringing me safely to
     the British lines.

     Worn with pain, and weak from the prolonged hardships which I had
     undergone, I was removed, with a great train of wounded sufferers, to
     the base hospital at Peshawar. Here I rallied, and had already
     improved so far as to be able to walk about the wards, and even to
     bask a little upon the verandah, when I was struck down by enteric
     fever, that curse of our Indian possessions. For months my life was
     despaired of, and when at last I came to myself and became
     convalescent, I was so weak and emaciated that a medical board
     determined that not a day should be lost in sending me back to
     England. I was dispatched, accordingly, in the troopship Orontes, and
     landed a month later on Portsmouth jetty, with my health
     irretrievably ruined, but with permission from a paternal government
     to spend the next nine months in attempting to improve it.

     I had neither kith nor kin in England, and was therefore as free as
     air--or as free as an income of eleven shillings and sixpence a day
     will permit a man to be. Under such circumstances, I naturally
     gravitated to London, that great cesspool into which all the loungers
     and idlers of the Empire are irresistibly drained. There I stayed for
     some time at a private hotel in the Strand, leading a comfortless,
     meaningless existence, and spending such money as I had, considerably
     more freely than I ought. So alarming did the state of my finances
     become, that I soon realized that I must either leave the metropolis
     and rusticate somewhere in the country, or that I must make a
     complete alteration in my style of living. Choosing the latter
     alternative, I began by making up my mind to leave the hotel, and to
     take up my quarters in some less pretentious and less expensive
     domicile.

     On the very day that I had come to this conclusion, I was standing at
     the Criterion Bar, when some one tapped me on the shoulder, and
     turning round I recognized young Stamford, who had been a dresser
     under me at Bart's. The sight of a friendly face in the great
     wilderness of London is a pleasant thing indeed to a lonely man. In
     old days Stamford had never been a particular crony of mine, but now
     I hailed him with enthusiasm, and he, in his turn, appeared to be
     delighted to see me. In the exuberance of my joy, I asked him to
     lunch with me at the Holborn, and we started off together in a
     hansom.

     "Whatever have you been doing with yourself, Watson?" he asked in
     undisguised wonder, as we rattled through the crowded London streets.
     "You are as thin as a lath and as brown as a nut."

     I gave him a short sketch of my adventures, and had hardly concluded
     it by the time that we reached our destination.

     "Poor devil!" he said, commiseratingly, after he had listened to my
     misfortunes. "What are you up to now?"

     "Looking for lodgings," I answered. "Trying to solve the problem as
     to whether it is possible to get comfortable rooms at a reasonable
     price."

     "That's a strange thing," remarked my companion; "you are the second
     man to-day that has used that expression to me."

     "And who was the first?" I asked.

     "A fellow who is working at the chemical laboratory up at the
     hospital. He was bemoaning himself this morning because he could not
     get someone to go halves with him in some nice rooms which he had
     found, and which were too much for his purse."

     "By Jove!" I cried, "if he really wants someone to share the rooms
     and the expense, I am the very man for him. I should prefer having a
     partner to being alone."

     Young Stamford looked rather strangely at me over his wine-glass.
     "You don't know Sherlock Holmes yet," he said; "perhaps you would not
     care for him as a constant companion."

     "Why, what is there against him?"

     "Oh, I didn't say there was anything against him. He is a little
     queer in his ideas--an enthusiast in some branches of science. As far
     as I know he is a decent fellow enough."

     "A medical student, I suppose?" said I.

     "No--I have no idea what he intends to go in for. I believe he is
     well up in anatomy, and he is a first-class chemist; but, as far as I
     know, he has never taken out any systematic medical classes. His
     studies are very desultory and eccentric, but he has amassed a lot of
     out-of-the way knowledge which would astonish his professors."

     "Did you never ask him what he was going in for?" I asked.

     "No; he is not a man that it is easy to draw out, though he can be
     communicative enough when the fancy seizes him."

     "I should like to meet him," I said. "If I am to lodge with anyone, I
     should prefer a man of studious and quiet habits. I am not strong
     enough yet to stand much noise or excitement. I had enough of both in
     Afghanistan to last me for the remainder of my natural existence. How
     could I meet this friend of yours?"

     "He is sure to be at the laboratory," returned my companion. "He
     either avoids the place for weeks, or else he works there from
     morning to night. If you like, we shall drive round together after
     luncheon."

     "Certainly," I answered, and the conversation drifted away into other
     channels.

     As we made our way to the hospital after leaving the Holborn,
     Stamford gave me a few more particulars about the gentleman whom I
     proposed to take as a fellow-lodger.

     "You mustn't blame me if you don't get on with him," he said; "I know
     nothing more of him than I have learned from meeting him occasionally
     in the laboratory. You proposed this arrangement, so you must not
     hold me responsible."

     "If we don't get on it will be easy to part company," I answered. "It
     seems to me, Stamford," I added, looking hard at my companion, "that
     you have some reason for washing your hands of the matter. Is this
     fellow's temper so formidable, or what is it? Don't be mealy-mouthed
     about it."

     "It is not easy to express the inexpressible," he answered with a
     laugh. "Holmes is a little too scientific for my tastes--it
     approaches to cold-bloodedness. I could imagine his giving a friend a
     little pinch of the latest vegetable alkaloid, not out of
     malevolence, you understand, but simply out of a spirit of inquiry in
     order to have an accurate idea of the effects. To do him justice, I
     think that he would take it himself with the same readiness. He
     appears to have a passion for definite and exact knowledge."

     "Very right too."

     "Yes, but it may be pushed to excess. When it comes to beating the
     subjects in the dissecting-rooms with a stick, it is certainly taking
     rather a bizarre shape."

     "Beating the subjects!"

     "Yes, to verify how far bruises may be produced after death. I saw
     him at it with my own eyes."

     "And yet you say he is not a medical student?"

     "No. Heaven knows what the objects of his studies are. But here we
     are, and you must form your own impressions about him." As he spoke,
     we turned down a narrow lane and passed through a small side-door,
     which opened into a wing of the great hospital. It was familiar
     ground to me, and I needed no guiding as we ascended the bleak stone
     staircase and made our way down the long corridor with its vista of
     whitewashed wall and dun-coloured doors. Near the further end a low
     arched passage branched away from it and led to the chemical
     laboratory.

     This was a lofty chamber, lined and littered with countless bottles.
     Broad, low tables were scattered about, which bristled with retorts,
     test-tubes, and little Bunsen lamps, with their blue flickering
     flames. There was only one student in the room, who was bending over
     a distant table absorbed in his work. At the sound of our steps he
     glanced round and sprang to his feet with a cry of pleasure. "I've
     found it! I've found it," he shouted to my companion, running towards
     us with a test-tube in his hand. "I have found a re-agent which is
     precipitated by hoemoglobin, and by nothing else." Had he discovered
     a gold mine, greater delight could not have shone upon his features.

     "Dr. Watson, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said Stamford, introducing us.

     "How are you?" he said cordially, gripping my hand with a strength
     for which I should hardly have given him credit. "You have been in
     Afghanistan, I perceive."

     "How on earth did you know that?" I asked in astonishment.

     "Never mind," said he, chuckling to himself. "The question now is
     about hoemoglobin. No doubt you see the significance of this
     discovery of mine?"

     "It is interesting, chemically, no doubt," I answered, "but
     practically--"

     "Why, man, it is the most practical medico-legal discovery for years.
     Don't you see that it gives us an infallible test for blood stains.
     Come over here now!" He seized me by the coat-sleeve in his
     eagerness, and drew me over to the table at which he had been
     working. "Let us have some fresh blood," he said, digging a long
     bodkin into his finger, and drawing off the resulting drop of blood
     in a chemical pipette. "Now, I add this small quantity of blood to a
     litre of water. You perceive that the resulting mixture has the
     appearance of pure water. The proportion of blood cannot be more than
     one in a million. I have no doubt, however, that we shall be able to
     obtain the characteristic reaction." As he spoke, he threw into the
     vessel a few white crystals, and then added some drops of a
     transparent fluid. In an instant the contents assumed a dull mahogany
     colour, and a brownish dust was precipitated to the bottom of the
     glass jar.

     "Ha! ha!" he cried, clapping his hands, and looking as delighted as a
     child with a new toy. "What do you think of that?"

     "It seems to be a very delicate test," I remarked.

     "Beautiful! beautiful! The old Guiacum test was very clumsy and
     uncertain. So is the microscopic examination for blood corpuscles.
     The latter is valueless if the stains are a few hours old. Now, this
     appears to act as well whether the blood is old or new. Had this test
     been invented, there are hundreds of men now walking the earth who
     would long ago have paid the penalty of their crimes."

     "Indeed!" I murmured.

     "Criminal cases are continually hinging upon that one point. A man is
     suspected of a crime months perhaps after it has been committed. His
     linen or clothes are examined, and brownish stains discovered upon
     them. Are they blood stains, or mud stains, or rust stains, or fruit
     stains, or what are they? That is a question which has puzzled many
     an expert, and why? Because there was no reliable test. Now we have
     the Sherlock Holmes' test, and there will no longer be any
     difficulty."

     His eyes fairly glittered as he spoke, and he put his hand over his
     heart and bowed as if to some applauding crowd conjured up by his
     imagination.

     "You are to be congratulated," I remarked, considerably surprised at
     his enthusiasm.

     "There was the case of Von Bischoff at Frankfort last year. He would
     certainly have been hung had this test been in existence. Then there
     was Mason of Bradford, and the notorious Muller, and Lefevre of
     Montpellier, and Samson of new Orleans. I could name a score of cases
     in which it would have been decisive."

     "You seem to be a walking calendar of crime," said Stamford with a
     laugh. "You might start a paper on those lines. Call it the 'Police
     News of the Past.'"

     "Very interesting reading it might be made, too," remarked Sherlock
     Holmes, sticking a small piece of plaster over the prick on his
     finger. "I have to be careful," he continued, turning to me with a
     smile, "for I dabble with poisons a good deal." He held out his hand
     as he spoke, and I noticed that it was all mottled over with similar
     pieces of plaster, and discoloured with strong acids.

     "We came here on business," said Stamford, sitting down on a high
     three-legged stool, and pushing another one in my direction with his
     foot. "My friend here wants to take diggings, and as you were
     complaining that you could get no one to go halves with you, I
     thought that I had better bring you together."

     Sherlock Holmes seemed delighted at the idea of sharing his rooms
     with me. "I have my eye on a suite in Baker Street," he said, "which
     would suit us down to the ground. You don't mind the smell of strong
     tobacco, I hope?"

     "I always smoke 'ship's' myself," I answered.

     "That's good enough. I generally have chemicals about, and
     occasionally do experiments. Would that annoy you?"

     "By no means."

     "Let me see--what are my other shortcomings. I get in the dumps at
     times, and don't open my mouth for days on end. You must not think I
     am sulky when I do that. Just let me alone, and I'll soon be right.
     What have you to confess now? It's just as well for two fellows to
     know the worst of one another before they begin to live together."

     I laughed at this cross-examination. "I keep a bull pup," I said,
     "and I object to rows because my nerves are shaken, and I get up at
     all sorts of ungodly hours, and I am extremely lazy. I have another
     set of vices when I'm well, but those are the principal ones at
     present."

     "Do you include violin-playing in your category of rows?" he asked,
     anxiously.

     "It depends on the player," I answered. "A well-played violin is a
     treat for the gods--a badly-played one--"

     "Oh, that's all right," he cried, with a merry laugh. "I think we may
     consider the thing as settled--that is, if the rooms are agreeable to
     you."

     "When shall we see them?"

     "Call for me here at noon to-morrow, and we'll go together and settle
     everything," he answered.

     "All right--noon exactly," said I, shaking his hand.

     We left him working among his chemicals, and we walked together
     towards my hotel.

     "By the way," I asked suddenly, stopping and turning upon Stamford,
     "how the deuce did he know that I had come from Afghanistan?"

     My companion smiled an enigmatical smile. "That's just his little
     peculiarity," he said. "A good many people have wanted to know how he
     finds things out."

     "Oh! a mystery is it?" I cried, rubbing my hands. "This is very
     piquant. I am much obliged to you for bringing us together. 'The
     proper study of mankind is man,' you know."

     "You must study him, then," Stamford said, as he bade me good-bye.
     "You'll find him a knotty problem, though. I'll wager he learns more
     about you than you about him. Good-bye."

     "Good-bye," I answered, and strolled on to my hotel, considerably
     interested in my new acquaintance.





          CHAPTER II
          The Science Of Deduction


     We met next day as he had arranged, and inspected the rooms at No.
     221b, Baker Street, of which he had spoken at our meeting. They
     consisted of a couple of comfortable bed-rooms and a single large
     airy sitting-room, cheerfully furnished, and illuminated by two broad
     windows. So desirable in every way were the apartments, and so
     moderate did the terms seem when divided between us, that the bargain
     was concluded upon the spot, and we at once entered into possession.
     That very evening I moved my things round from the hotel, and on the
     following morning Sherlock Holmes followed me with several boxes and
     portmanteaus. For a day or two we were busily employed in unpacking
     and laying out our property to the best advantage. That done, we
     gradually began to settle down and to accommodate ourselves to our
     new surroundings.

     Holmes was certainly not a difficult man to live with. He was quiet
     in his ways, and his habits were regular. It was rare for him to be
     up after ten at night, and he had invariably breakfasted and gone out
     before I rose in the morning. Sometimes he spent his day at the
     chemical laboratory, sometimes in the dissecting-rooms, and
     occasionally in long walks, which appeared to take him into the
     lowest portions of the City. Nothing could exceed his energy when the
     working fit was upon him; but now and again a reaction would seize
     him, and for days on end he would lie upon the sofa in the
     sitting-room, hardly uttering a word or moving a muscle from morning
     to night. On these occasions I have noticed such a dreamy, vacant
     expression in his eyes, that I might have suspected him of being
     addicted to the use of some narcotic, had not the temperance and
     cleanliness of his whole life forbidden such a notion.

     As the weeks went by, my interest in him and my curiosity as to his
     aims in life, gradually deepened and increased. His very person and
     appearance were such as to strike the attention of the most casual
     observer. In height he was rather over six feet, and so excessively
     lean that he seemed to be considerably taller. His eyes were sharp
     and piercing, save during those intervals of torpor to which I have
     alluded; and his thin, hawk-like nose gave his whole expression an
     air of alertness and decision. His chin, too, had the prominence and
     squareness which mark the man of determination. His hands were
     invariably blotted with ink and stained with chemicals, yet he was
     possessed of extraordinary delicacy of touch, as I frequently had
     occasion to observe when I watched him manipulating his fragile
     philosophical instruments.

     The reader may set me down as a hopeless busybody, when I confess how
     much this man stimulated my curiosity, and how often I endeavoured to
     break through the reticence which he showed on all that concerned
     himself. Before pronouncing judgment, however, be it remembered, how
     objectless was my life, and how little there was to engage my
     attention. My health forbade me from venturing out unless the weather
     was exceptionally genial, and I had no friends who would call upon me
     and break the monotony of my daily existence. Under these
     circumstances, I eagerly hailed the little mystery which hung around
     my companion, and spent much of my time in endeavouring to unravel
     it.

     He was not studying medicine. He had himself, in reply to a question,
     confirmed Stamford's opinion upon that point. Neither did he appear
     to have pursued any course of reading which might fit him for a
     degree in science or any other recognized portal which would give him
     an entrance into the learned world. Yet his zeal for certain studies
     was remarkable, and within eccentric limits his knowledge was so
     extraordinarily ample and minute that his observations have fairly
     astounded me. Surely no man would work so hard or attain such precise
     information unless he had some definite end in view. Desultory
     readers are seldom remarkable for the exactness of their learning. No
     man burdens his mind with small matters unless he has some very good
     reason for doing so.

     His ignorance was as remarkable as his knowledge. Of contemporary
     literature, philosophy and politics he appeared to know next to
     nothing. Upon my quoting Thomas Carlyle, he inquired in the naivest
     way who he might be and what he had done. My surprise reached a
     climax, however, when I found incidentally that he was ignorant of
     the Copernican Theory and of the composition of the Solar System.
     That any civilized human being in this nineteenth century should not
     be aware that the earth travelled round the sun appeared to be to me
     such an extraordinary fact that I could hardly realize it.

     "You appear to be astonished," he said, smiling at my expression of
     surprise. "Now that I do know it I shall do my best to forget it."

     "To forget it!"

     "You see," he explained, "I consider that a man's brain originally is
     like a little empty attic, and you have to stock it with such
     furniture as you choose. A fool takes in all the lumber of every sort
     that he comes across, so that the knowledge which might be useful to
     him gets crowded out, or at best is jumbled up with a lot of other
     things so that he has a difficulty in laying his hands upon it. Now
     the skilful workman is very careful indeed as to what he takes into
     his brain-attic. He will have nothing but the tools which may help
     him in doing his work, but of these he has a large assortment, and
     all in the most perfect order. It is a mistake to think that that
     little room has elastic walls and can distend to any extent. Depend
     upon it there comes a time when for every addition of knowledge you
     forget something that you knew before. It is of the highest
     importance, therefore, not to have useless facts elbowing out the
     useful ones."

     "But the Solar System!" I protested.

     "What the deuce is it to me?" he interrupted impatiently; "you say
     that we go round the sun. If we went round the moon it would not make
     a pennyworth of difference to me or to my work."

     I was on the point of asking him what that work might be, but
     something in his manner showed me that the question would be an
     unwelcome one. I pondered over our short conversation, however, and
     endeavoured to draw my deductions from it. He said that he would
     acquire no knowledge which did not bear upon his object. Therefore
     all the knowledge which he possessed was such as would be useful to
     him. I enumerated in my own mind all the various points upon which he
     had shown me that he was exceptionally well-informed. I even took a
     pencil and jotted them down. I could not help smiling at the document
     when I had completed it. It ran in this way--

     Sherlock Holmes--his limits.
     
     1. Knowledge of Literature.--Nil.
     2. Philosophy.--Nil.
     3. Astronomy.--Nil.
     4. Politics.--Feeble.
     5. Botany.--Variable. Well up in belladonna, opium, and poisons
     generally. Knows nothing of practical gardening.
     6. Geology.--Practical, but limited. Tells at a glance different
     soils from each other. After walks has shown me splashes upon his
     trousers, and told me by their colour and consistence in what part of
     London he had received them.
     7. Chemistry.--Profound.
     8. Anatomy.--Accurate, but unsystematic.
     9. Sensational Literature.--Immense. He appears to know every detail
     of every horror perpetrated in the century.
     10. Plays the violin well.
     11. Is an expert singlestick player, boxer, and swordsman.
     12. Has a good practical knowledge of British law.

     When I had got so far in my list I threw it into the fire in despair.
     "If I can only find what the fellow is driving at by reconciling all
     these accomplishments, and discovering a calling which needs them
     all," I said to myself, "I may as well give up the attempt at once."

     I see that I have alluded above to his powers upon the violin. These
     were very remarkable, but as eccentric as all his other
     accomplishments. That he could play pieces, and difficult pieces, I
     knew well, because at my request he has played me some of
     Mendelssohn's Lieder, and other favourites. When left to himself,
     however, he would seldom produce any music or attempt any recognized
     air. Leaning back in his arm-chair of an evening, he would close his
     eyes and scrape carelessly at the fiddle which was thrown across his
     knee. Sometimes the chords were sonorous and melancholy. Occasionally
     they were fantastic and cheerful. Clearly they reflected the thoughts
     which possessed him, but whether the music aided those thoughts, or
     whether the playing was simply the result of a whim or fancy was more
     than I could determine. I might have rebelled against these
     exasperating solos had it not been that he usually terminated them by
     playing in quick succession a whole series of my favourite airs as a
     slight compensation for the trial upon my patience.

     During the first week or so we had no callers, and I had begun to
     think that my companion was as friendless a man as I was myself.
     Presently, however, I found that he had many acquaintances, and those
     in the most different classes of society. There was one little sallow
     rat-faced, dark-eyed fellow who was introduced to me as Mr. Lestrade,
     and who came three or four times in a single week. One morning a
     young girl called, fashionably dressed, and stayed for half an hour
     or more. The same afternoon brought a grey-headed, seedy visitor,
     looking like a Jew pedlar, who appeared to me to be much excited, and
     who was closely followed by a slipshod elderly woman. On another
     occasion an old white-haired gentleman had an interview with my
     companion; and on another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform.
     When any of these nondescript individuals put in an appearance,
     Sherlock Holmes used to beg for the use of the sitting-room, and I
     would retire to my bed-room. He always apologized to me for putting
     me to this inconvenience. "I have to use this room as a place of
     business," he said, "and these people are my clients." Again I had an
     opportunity of asking him a point blank question, and again my
     delicacy prevented me from forcing another man to confide in me. I
     imagined at the time that he had some strong reason for not alluding
     to it, but he soon dispelled the idea by coming round to the subject
     of his own accord.

     It was upon the 4th of March, as I have good reason to remember, that
     I rose somewhat earlier than usual, and found that Sherlock Holmes
     had not yet finished his breakfast. The landlady had become so
     accustomed to my late habits that my place had not been laid nor my
     coffee prepared. With the unreasonable petulance of mankind I rang
     the bell and gave a curt intimation that I was ready. Then I picked
     up a magazine from the table and attempted to while away the time
     with it, while my companion munched silently at his toast. One of the
     articles had a pencil mark at the heading, and I naturally began to
     run my eye through it.

     Its somewhat ambitious title was "The Book of Life," and it attempted
     to show how much an observant man might learn by an accurate and
     systematic examination of all that came in his way. It struck me as
     being a remarkable mixture of shrewdness and of absurdity. The
     reasoning was close and intense, but the deductions appeared to me to
     be far-fetched and exaggerated. The writer claimed by a momentary
     expression, a twitch of a muscle or a glance of an eye, to fathom a
     man's inmost thoughts. Deceit, according to him, was an impossibility
     in the case of one trained to observation and analysis. His
     conclusions were as infallible as so many propositions of Euclid. So
     startling would his results appear to the uninitiated that until they
     learned the processes by which he had arrived at them they might well
     consider him as a necromancer.

     "From a drop of water," said the writer, "a logician could infer the
     possibility of an Atlantic or a Niagara without having seen or heard
     of one or the other. So all life is a great chain, the nature of
     which is known whenever we are shown a single link of it. Like all
     other arts, the Science of Deduction and Analysis is one which can
     only be acquired by long and patient study nor is life long enough to
     allow any mortal to attain the highest possible perfection in it.
     Before turning to those moral and mental aspects of the matter which
     present the greatest difficulties, let the enquirer begin by
     mastering more elementary problems. Let him, on meeting a
     fellow-mortal, learn at a glance to distinguish the history of the
     man, and the trade or profession to which he belongs. Puerile as such
     an exercise may seem, it sharpens the faculties of observation, and
     teaches one where to look and what to look for. By a man's finger
     nails, by his coat-sleeve, by his boot, by his trouser knees, by the
     callosities of his forefinger and thumb, by his expression, by his
     shirt cuffs--by each of these things a man's calling is plainly
     revealed. That all united should fail to enlighten the competent
     enquirer in any case is almost inconceivable."

     "What ineffable twaddle!" I cried, slapping the magazine down on the
     table, "I never read such rubbish in my life."

     "What is it?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

     "Why, this article," I said, pointing at it with my egg spoon as I
     sat down to my breakfast. "I see that you have read it since you have
     marked it. I don't deny that it is smartly written. It irritates me
     though. It is evidently the theory of some arm-chair lounger who
     evolves all these neat little paradoxes in the seclusion of his own
     study. It is not practical. I should like to see him clapped down in
     a third class carriage on the Underground, and asked to give the
     trades of all his fellow-travellers. I would lay a thousand to one
     against him."

     "You would lose your money," Sherlock Holmes remarked calmly.  "As
     for the article I wrote it myself."

     "You!"

     "Yes, I have a turn both for observation and for deduction. The
     theories which I have expressed there, and which appear to you to be
     so chimerical are really extremely practical--so practical that I
     depend upon them for my bread and cheese."

     "And how?" I asked involuntarily.

     "Well, I have a trade of my own. I suppose I am the only one in the
     world. I'm a consulting detective, if you can understand what that
     is. Here in London we have lots of Government detectives and lots of
     private ones. When these fellows are at fault they come to me, and I
     manage to put them on the right scent. They lay all the evidence
     before me, and I am generally able, by the help of my knowledge of
     the history of crime, to set them straight. There is a strong family
     resemblance about misdeeds, and if you have all the details of a
     thousand at your finger ends, it is odd if you can't unravel the
     thousand and first. Lestrade is a well-known detective. He got
     himself into a fog recently over a forgery case, and that was what
     brought him here."

     "And these other people?"

     "They are mostly sent on by private inquiry agencies. They are all
     people who are in trouble about something, and want a little
     enlightening. I listen to their story, they listen to my comments,
     and then I pocket my fee."

     "But do you mean to say," I said, "that without leaving your room you
     can unravel some knot which other men can make nothing of, although
     they have seen every detail for themselves?"

     "Quite so. I have a kind of intuition that way. Now and again a case
     turns up which is a little more complex. Then I have to bustle about
     and see things with my own eyes. You see I have a lot of special
     knowledge which I apply to the problem, and which facilitates matters
     wonderfully. Those rules of deduction laid down in that article which
     aroused your scorn, are invaluable to me in practical work.
     Observation with me is second nature. You appeared to be surprised
     when I told you, on our first meeting, that you had come from
     Afghanistan."

     "You were told, no doubt."

     "Nothing of the sort. I knew you came from Afghanistan. From long
     habit the train of thoughts ran so swiftly through my mind, that I
     arrived at the conclusion without being conscious of intermediate
     steps. There were such steps, however. The train of reasoning ran,
     'Here is a gentleman of a medical type, but with the air of a
     military man. Clearly an army doctor, then. He has just come from the
     tropics, for his face is dark, and that is not the natural tint of
     his skin, for his wrists are fair. He has undergone hardship and
     sickness, as his haggard face says clearly. His left arm has been
     injured. He holds it in a stiff and unnatural manner. Where in the
     tropics could an English army doctor have seen much hardship and got
     his arm wounded? Clearly in Afghanistan.' The whole train of thought
     did not occupy a second. I then remarked that you came from
     Afghanistan, and you were astonished."

     "It is simple enough as you explain it," I said, smiling. "You remind
     me of Edgar Allen Poe's Dupin. I had no idea that such individuals
     did exist outside of stories."

     Sherlock Holmes rose and lit his pipe. "No doubt you think that you
     are complimenting me in comparing me to Dupin," he observed. "Now, in
     my opinion, Dupin was a very inferior fellow. That trick of his of
     breaking in on his friends' thoughts with an apropos remark after a
     quarter of an hour's silence is really very showy and superficial. He
     had some analytical genius, no doubt; but he was by no means such a
     phenomenon as Poe appeared to imagine."

     "Have you read Gaboriau's works?" I asked. "Does Lecoq come up to
     your idea of a detective?"

     Sherlock Holmes sniffed sardonically. "Lecoq was a miserable
     bungler," he said, in an angry voice; "he had only one thing to
     recommend him, and that was his energy. That book made me positively
     ill. The question was how to identify an unknown prisoner. I could
     have done it in twenty-four hours. Lecoq took six months or so. It
     might be made a text-book for detectives to teach them what to
     avoid."

     I felt rather indignant at having two characters whom I had admired
     treated in this cavalier style. I walked over to the window, and
     stood looking out into the busy street. "This fellow may be very
     clever," I said to myself, "but he is certainly very conceited."

     "There are no crimes and no criminals in these days," he said,
     querulously. "What is the use of having brains in our profession? I
     know well that I have it in me to make my name famous. No man lives
     or has ever lived who has brought the same amount of study and of
     natural talent to the detection of crime which I have done. And what
     is the result? There is no crime to detect, or, at most, some
     bungling villany with a motive so transparent that even a Scotland
     Yard official can see through it."

     I was still annoyed at his bumptious style of conversation. I thought
     it best to change the topic.

     "I wonder what that fellow is looking for?" I asked, pointing to a
     stalwart, plainly-dressed individual who was walking slowly down the
     other side of the street, looking anxiously at the numbers. He had a
     large blue envelope in his hand, and was evidently the bearer of a
     message.

     "You mean the retired sergeant of Marines," said Sherlock Holmes.

     "Brag and bounce!" thought I to myself. "He knows that I cannot
     verify his guess."

     The thought had hardly passed through my mind when the man whom we
     were watching caught sight of the number on our door, and ran rapidly
     across the roadway. We heard a loud knock, a deep voice below, and
     heavy steps ascending the stair.

     "For Mr. Sherlock Holmes," he said, stepping into the room and
     handing my friend the letter.

     Here was an opportunity of taking the conceit out of him. He little
     thought of this when he made that random shot. "May I ask, my lad," I
     said, in the blandest voice, "what your trade may be?"

     "Commissionaire, sir," he said, gruffly. "Uniform away for repairs."

     "And you were?" I asked, with a slightly malicious glance at my
     companion.

     "A sergeant, sir, Royal Marine Light Infantry, sir. No answer? Right,
     sir."

     He clicked his heels together, raised his hand in a salute, and was
     gone.





          CHAPTER III
          The Lauriston Garden Mystery


     I confess that I was considerably startled by this fresh proof of the
     practical nature of my companion's theories. My respect for his
     powers of analysis increased wondrously. There still remained some
     lurking suspicion in my mind, however, that the whole thing was a
     pre-arranged episode, intended to dazzle me, though what earthly
     object he could have in taking me in was past my comprehension. When
     I looked at him he had finished reading the note, and his eyes had
     assumed the vacant, lack-lustre expression which showed mental
     abstraction.

     "How in the world did you deduce that?" I asked.

     "Deduce what?" said he, petulantly.

     "Why, that he was a retired sergeant of Marines."

     "I have no time for trifles," he answered, brusquely; then with a
     smile, "Excuse my rudeness. You broke the thread of my thoughts; but
     perhaps it is as well. So you actually were not able to see that that
     man was a sergeant of Marines?"

     "No, indeed."

     "It was easier to know it than to explain why I knew it. If you were
     asked to prove that two and two made four, you might find some
     difficulty, and yet you are quite sure of the fact. Even across the
     street I could see a great blue anchor tattooed on the back of the
     fellow's hand. That smacked of the sea. He had a military carriage,
     however, and regulation side whiskers. There we have the marine. He
     was a man with some amount of self-importance and a certain air of
     command. You must have observed the way in which he held his head and
     swung his cane. A steady, respectable, middle-aged man, too, on the
     face of him--all facts which led me to believe that he had been a
     sergeant."

     "Wonderful!" I ejaculated.

     "Commonplace," said Holmes, though I thought from his expression that
     he was pleased at my evident surprise and admiration. "I said just
     now that there were no criminals. It appears that I am wrong--look at
     this!" He threw me over the note which the commissionaire had
     brought.

     "Why," I cried, as I cast my eye over it, "this is terrible!"

     "It does seem to be a little out of the common," he remarked, calmly.
     "Would you mind reading it to me aloud?"

     This is the letter which I read to him--

     "My dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes:
     "There has been a bad business during the night at 3, Lauriston
     Gardens, off the Brixton Road. Our man on the beat saw a light there
     about two in the morning, and as the house was an empty one,
     suspected that something was amiss. He found the door open, and in
     the front room, which is bare of furniture, discovered the body of a
     gentleman, well dressed, and having cards in his pocket bearing the
     name of 'Enoch J. Drebber, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.' There had been no
     robbery, nor is there any evidence as to how the man met his death.
     There are marks of blood in the room, but there is no wound upon his
     person. We are at a loss as to how he came into the empty house;
     indeed, the whole affair is a puzzler. If you can come round to the
     house any time before twelve, you will find me there. I have left
     everything in statu quo until I hear from you. If you are unable to
     come I shall give you fuller details, and would esteem it a great
     kindness if you would favour me with your opinion.
     "Yours faithfully,
     "Tobias Gregson."

     "Gregson is the smartest of the Scotland Yarders," my friend
     remarked; "he and Lestrade are the pick of a bad lot. They are both
     quick and energetic, but conventional--shockingly so. They have their
     knives into one another, too. They are as jealous as a pair of
     professional beauties. There will be some fun over this case if they
     are both put upon the scent."

     I was amazed at the calm way in which he rippled on. "Surely there is
     not a moment to be lost," I cried, "shall I go and order you a cab?"

     "I'm not sure about whether I shall go. I am the most incurably lazy
     devil that ever stood in shoe leather--that is, when the fit is on
     me, for I can be spry enough at times."

     "Why, it is just such a chance as you have been longing for."

     "My dear fellow, what does it matter to me. Supposing I unravel the
     whole matter, you may be sure that Gregson, Lestrade, and Co. will
     pocket all the credit. That comes of being an unofficial personage."

     "But he begs you to help him."

     "Yes. He knows that I am his superior, and acknowledges it to me; but
     he would cut his tongue out before he would own it to any third
     person. However, we may as well go and have a look. I shall work it
     out on my own hook. I may have a laugh at them if I have nothing
     else. Come on!"

     He hustled on his overcoat, and bustled about in a way that showed
     that an energetic fit had superseded the apathetic one.

     "Get your hat," he said.

     "You wish me to come?"

     "Yes, if you have nothing better to do." A minute later we were both
     in a hansom, driving furiously for the Brixton Road.

     It was a foggy, cloudy morning, and a dun-coloured veil hung over the
     house-tops, looking like the reflection of the mud-coloured streets
     beneath. My companion was in the best of spirits, and prattled away
     about Cremona fiddles, and the difference between a Stradivarius and
     an Amati. As for myself, I was silent, for the dull weather and the
     melancholy business upon which we were engaged, depressed my spirits.

     "You don't seem to give much thought to the matter in hand," I said
     at last, interrupting Holmes' musical disquisition.

     "No data yet," he answered. "It is a capital mistake to theorize
     before you have all the evidence. It biases the judgment."

     "You will have your data soon," I remarked, pointing with my finger;
     "this is the Brixton Road, and that is the house, if I am not very
     much mistaken."

     "So it is. Stop, driver, stop!" We were still a hundred yards or so
     from it, but he insisted upon our alighting, and we finished our
     journey upon foot.

     Number 3, Lauriston Gardens wore an ill-omened and minatory look. It
     was one of four which stood back some little way from the street, two
     being occupied and two empty. The latter looked out with three tiers
     of vacant melancholy windows, which were blank and dreary, save that
     here and there a "To Let" card had developed like a cataract upon the
     bleared panes. A small garden sprinkled over with a scattered
     eruption of sickly plants separated each of these houses from the
     street, and was traversed by a narrow pathway, yellowish in colour,
     and consisting apparently of a mixture of clay and of gravel. The
     whole place was very sloppy from the rain which had fallen through
     the night. The garden was bounded by a three-foot brick wall with a
     fringe of wood rails upon the top, and against this wall was leaning
     a stalwart police constable, surrounded by a small knot of loafers,
     who craned their necks and strained their eyes in the vain hope of
     catching some glimpse of the proceedings within.

     I had imagined that Sherlock Holmes would at once have hurried into
     the house and plunged into a study of the mystery. Nothing appeared
     to be further from his intention. With an air of nonchalance which,
     under the circumstances, seemed to me to border upon affectation, he
     lounged up and down the pavement, and gazed vacantly at the ground,
     the sky, the opposite houses and the line of railings. Having
     finished his scrutiny, he proceeded slowly down the path, or rather
     down the fringe of grass which flanked the path, keeping his eyes
     riveted upon the ground. Twice he stopped, and once I saw him smile,
     and heard him utter an exclamation of satisfaction. There were many
     marks of footsteps upon the wet clayey soil, but since the police had
     been coming and going over it, I was unable to see how my companion
     could hope to learn anything from it. Still I had had such
     extraordinary evidence of the quickness of his perceptive faculties,
     that I had no doubt that he could see a great deal which was hidden
     from me.

     At the door of the house we were met by a tall, white-faced,
     flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward
     and wrung my companion's hand with effusion. "It is indeed kind of
     you to come," he said, "I have had everything left untouched."

     "Except that!" my friend answered, pointing at the pathway. "If a
     herd of buffaloes had passed along there could not be a greater mess.
     No doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson,
     before you permitted this."

     "I have had so much to do inside the house," the detective said
     evasively. "My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon
     him to look after this."

     Holmes glanced at me and raised his eyebrows sardonically. "With two
     such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be
     much for a third party to find out," he said.

     Gregson rubbed his hands in a self-satisfied way. "I think we have
     done all that can be done," he answered; "it's a queer case though,
     and I knew your taste for such things."

     "You did not come here in a cab?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

     "No, sir."

     "Nor Lestrade?"

     "No, sir."

     "Then let us go and look at the room." With which inconsequent remark
     he strode on into the house, followed by Gregson, whose features
     expressed his astonishment.

     A short passage, bare planked and dusty, led to the kitchen and
     offices. Two doors opened out of it to the left and to the right. One
     of these had obviously been closed for many weeks. The other belonged
     to the dining-room, which was the apartment in which the mysterious
     affair had occurred. Holmes walked in, and I followed him with that
     subdued feeling at my heart which the presence of death inspires.

     It was a large square room, looking all the larger from the absence
     of all furniture. A vulgar flaring paper adorned the walls, but it
     was blotched in places with mildew, and here and there great strips
     had become detached and hung down, exposing the yellow plaster
     beneath. Opposite the door was a showy fireplace, surmounted by a
     mantelpiece of imitation white marble. On one corner of this was
     stuck the stump of a red wax candle. The solitary window was so dirty
     that the light was hazy and uncertain, giving a dull grey tinge to
     everything, which was intensified by the thick layer of dust which
     coated the whole apartment.

     All these details I observed afterwards. At present my attention was
     centred upon the single grim motionless figure which lay stretched
     upon the boards, with vacant sightless eyes staring up at the
     discoloured ceiling. It was that of a man about forty-three or
     forty-four years of age, middle-sized, broad shouldered, with crisp
     curling black hair, and a short stubbly beard. He was dressed in a
     heavy broadcloth frock coat and waistcoat, with light-coloured
     trousers, and immaculate collar and cuffs. A top hat, well brushed
     and trim, was placed upon the floor beside him. His hands were
     clenched and his arms thrown abroad, while his lower limbs were
     interlocked as though his death struggle had been a grievous one. On
     his rigid face there stood an expression of horror, and as it seemed
     to me, of hatred, such as I have never seen upon human features. This
     malignant and terrible contortion, combined with the low forehead,
     blunt nose, and prognathous jaw gave the dead man a singularly
     simious and ape-like appearance, which was increased by his writhing,
     unnatural posture. I have seen death in many forms, but never has it
     appeared to me in a more fearsome aspect than in that dark grimy
     apartment, which looked out upon one of the main arteries of suburban
     London.

     Lestrade, lean and ferret-like as ever, was standing by the doorway,
     and greeted my companion and myself.

     "This case will make a stir, sir," he remarked. "It beats anything I
     have seen, and I am no chicken."

     "There is no clue?" said Gregson.

     "None at all," chimed in Lestrade.

     Sherlock Holmes approached the body, and, kneeling down, examined it
     intently. "You are sure that there is no wound?" he asked, pointing
     to numerous gouts and splashes of blood which lay all round.

     "Positive!" cried both detectives.

     "Then, of course, this blood belongs to a second
     individual--presumably the murderer, if murder has been committed. It
     reminds me of the circumstances attendant on the death of Van Jansen,
     in Utrecht, in the year '34. Do you remember the case, Gregson?"

     "No, sir."

     "Read it up--you really should. There is nothing new under the sun.
     It has all been done before."

     As he spoke, his nimble fingers were flying here, there, and
     everywhere, feeling, pressing, unbuttoning, examining, while his eyes
     wore the same far-away expression which I have already remarked upon.
     So swiftly was the examination made, that one would hardly have
     guessed the minuteness with which it was conducted. Finally, he
     sniffed the dead man's lips, and then glanced at the soles of his
     patent leather boots.

     "He has not been moved at all?" he asked.

     "No more than was necessary for the purposes of our examination."

     "You can take him to the mortuary now," he said. "There is nothing
     more to be learned."

     Gregson had a stretcher and four men at hand. At his call they
     entered the room, and the stranger was lifted and carried out. As
     they raised him, a ring tinkled down and rolled across the floor.
     Lestrade grabbed it up and stared at it with mystified eyes.

     "There's been a woman here," he cried. "It's a woman's wedding-ring."

     He held it out, as he spoke, upon the palm of his hand. We all
     gathered round him and gazed at it. There could be no doubt that that
     circlet of plain gold had once adorned the finger of a bride.

     "This complicates matters," said Gregson. "Heaven knows, they were
     complicated enough before."

     "You're sure it doesn't simplify them?" observed Holmes. "There's
     nothing to be learned by staring at it. What did you find in his
     pockets?"

     "We have it all here," said Gregson, pointing to a litter of objects
     upon one of the bottom steps of the stairs. "A gold watch, No. 97163,
     by Barraud, of London. Gold Albert chain, very heavy and solid. Gold
     ring, with masonic device. Gold pin--bull-dog's head, with rubies as
     eyes. Russian leather card-case, with cards of Enoch J. Drebber of
     Cleveland, corresponding with the E. J. D. upon the linen. No purse,
     but loose money to the extent of seven pounds thirteen. Pocket
     edition of Boccaccio's 'Decameron,' with name of Joseph Stangerson
     upon the fly-leaf. Two letters--one addressed to E. J. Drebber and
     one to Joseph Stangerson."

     "At what address?"

     "American Exchange, Strand--to be left till called for. They are both
     from the Guion Steamship Company, and refer to the sailing of their
     boats from Liverpool. It is clear that this unfortunate man was about
     to return to New York."

     "Have you made any inquiries as to this man, Stangerson?"

     "I did it at once, sir," said Gregson. "I have had advertisements
     sent to all the newspapers, and one of my men has gone to the
     American Exchange, but he has not returned yet."

     "Have you sent to Cleveland?"

     "We telegraphed this morning."

     "How did you word your inquiries?"

     "We simply detailed the circumstances, and said that we should be
     glad of any information which could help us."

     "You did not ask for particulars on any point which appeared to you
     to be crucial?"

     "I asked about Stangerson."

     "Nothing else? Is there no circumstance on which this whole case
     appears to hinge? Will you not telegraph again?"

     "I have said all I have to say," said Gregson, in an offended voice.

     Sherlock Holmes chuckled to himself, and appeared to be about to make
     some remark, when Lestrade, who had been in the front room while we
     were holding this conversation in the hall, reappeared upon the
     scene, rubbing his hands in a pompous and self-satisfied manner.

     "Mr. Gregson," he said, "I have just made a discovery of the highest
     importance, and one which would have been overlooked had I not made a
     careful examination of the walls."

     The little man's eyes sparkled as he spoke, and he was evidently in a
     state of suppressed exultation at having scored a point against his
     colleague.

     "Come here," he said, bustling back into the room, the atmosphere of
     which felt clearer since the removal of its ghastly inmate. "Now,
     stand there!"

     He struck a match on his boot and held it up against the wall.

     "Look at that!" he said, triumphantly.

     I have remarked that the paper had fallen away in parts. In this
     particular corner of the room a large piece had peeled off, leaving a
     yellow square of coarse plastering. Across this bare space there was
     scrawled in blood-red letters a single word--

                                     RACHE.

     "What do you think of that?" cried the detective, with the air of a
     showman exhibiting his show. "This was overlooked because it was in
     the darkest corner of the room, and no one thought of looking there.
     The murderer has written it with his or her own blood. See this smear
     where it has trickled down the wall! That disposes of the idea of
     suicide anyhow. Why was that corner chosen to write it on? I will
     tell you. See that candle on the mantelpiece. It was lit at the time,
     and if it was lit this corner would be the brightest instead of the
     darkest portion of the wall."

     "And what does it mean now that you have found it?" asked Gregson in
     a depreciatory voice.

     "Mean? Why, it means that the writer was going to put the female name
     Rachel, but was disturbed before he or she had time to finish. You
     mark my words, when this case comes to be cleared up you will find
     that a woman named Rachel has something to do with it. It's all very
     well for you to laugh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You may be very smart and
     clever, but the old hound is the best, when all is said and done."

     "I really beg your pardon!" said my companion, who had ruffled the
     little man's temper by bursting into an explosion of laughter. "You
     certainly have the credit of being the first of us to find this out,
     and, as you say, it bears every mark of having been written by the
     other participant in last night's mystery. I have not had time to
     examine this room yet, but with your permission I shall do so now."

     As he spoke, he whipped a tape measure and a large round magnifying
     glass from his pocket. With these two implements he trotted
     noiselessly about the room, sometimes stopping, occasionally
     kneeling, and once lying flat upon his face. So engrossed was he with
     his occupation that he appeared to have forgotten our presence, for
     he chattered away to himself under his breath the whole time, keeping
     up a running fire of exclamations, groans, whistles, and little cries
     suggestive of encouragement and of hope. As I watched him I was
     irresistibly reminded of a pure-blooded well-trained foxhound as it
     dashes backwards and forwards through the covert, whining in its
     eagerness, until it comes across the lost scent. For twenty minutes
     or more he continued his researches, measuring with the most exact
     care the distance between marks which were entirely invisible to me,
     and occasionally applying his tape to the walls in an equally
     incomprehensible manner. In one place he gathered up very carefully a
     little pile of grey dust from the floor, and packed it away in an
     envelope. Finally, he examined with his glass the word upon the wall,
     going over every letter of it with the most minute exactness. This
     done, he appeared to be satisfied, for he replaced his tape and his
     glass in his pocket.

     "They say that genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains," he
     remarked with a smile. "It's a very bad definition, but it does apply
     to detective work."

     Gregson and Lestrade had watched the manoeuvres of their amateur
     companion with considerable curiosity and some contempt. They
     evidently failed to appreciate the fact, which I had begun to
     realize, that Sherlock Holmes' smallest actions were all directed
     towards some definite and practical end.

     "What do you think of it, sir?" they both asked.

     "It would be robbing you of the credit of the case if I was to
     presume to help you," remarked my friend. "You are doing so well now
     that it would be a pity for anyone to interfere." There was a world
     of sarcasm in his voice as he spoke. "If you will let me know how
     your investigations go," he continued, "I shall be happy to give you
     any help I can. In the meantime I should like to speak to the
     constable who found the body. Can you give me his name and address?"

     Lestrade glanced at his note-book. "John Rance," he said. "He is off
     duty now. You will find him at 46, Audley Court, Kennington Park
     Gate."

     Holmes took a note of the address.

     "Come along, Doctor," he said; "we shall go and look him up. I'll
     tell you one thing which may help you in the case," he continued,
     turning to the two detectives. "There has been murder done, and the
     murderer was a man. He was more than six feet high, was in the prime
     of life, had small feet for his height, wore coarse, square-toed
     boots and smoked a Trichinopoly cigar. He came here with his victim
     in a four-wheeled cab, which was drawn by a horse with three old
     shoes and one new one on his off fore leg. In all probability the
     murderer had a florid face, and the finger-nails of his right hand
     were remarkably long. These are only a few indications, but they may
     assist you."

     Lestrade and Gregson glanced at each other with an incredulous smile.

     "If this man was murdered, how was it done?" asked the former.

     "Poison," said Sherlock Holmes curtly, and strode off. "One other
     thing, Lestrade," he added, turning round at the door: "'Rache,' is
     the German for 'revenge;' so don't lose your time looking for Miss
     Rachel."

     With which Parthian shot he walked away, leaving the two rivals
     open-mouthed behind him. 





          CHAPTER IV
          What John Rance Had To Tell


     It was one o'clock when we left No. 3, Lauriston Gardens. Sherlock
     Holmes led me to the nearest telegraph office, whence he dispatched a
     long telegram. He then hailed a cab, and ordered the driver to take
     us to the address given us by Lestrade.

     "There is nothing like first hand evidence," he remarked; "as a
     matter of fact, my mind is entirely made up upon the case, but still
     we may as well learn all that is to be learned."

     "You amaze me, Holmes," said I. "Surely you are not as sure as you
     pretend to be of all those particulars which you gave."

     "There's no room for a mistake," he answered. "The very first thing
     which I observed on arriving there was that a cab had made two ruts
     with its wheels close to the curb. Now, up to last night, we have had
     no rain for a week, so that those wheels which left such a deep
     impression must have been there during the night. There were the
     marks of the horse's hoofs, too, the outline of one of which was far
     more clearly cut than that of the other three, showing that that was
     a new shoe. Since the cab was there after the rain began, and was not
     there at any time during the morning--I have Gregson's word for
     that--it follows that it must have been there during the night, and,
     therefore, that it brought those two individuals to the house."

     "That seems simple enough," said I; "but how about the other man's
     height?"

     "Why, the height of a man, in nine cases out of ten, can be told from
     the length of his stride. It is a simple calculation enough, though
     there is no use my boring you with figures. I had this fellow's
     stride both on the clay outside and on the dust within. Then I had a
     way of checking my calculation. When a man writes on a wall, his
     instinct leads him to write about the level of his own eyes. Now that
     writing was just over six feet from the ground. It was child's play."

     "And his age?" I asked.

     "Well, if a man can stride four and a-half feet without the smallest
     effort, he can't be quite in the sere and yellow. That was the
     breadth of a puddle on the garden walk which he had evidently walked
     across. Patent-leather boots had gone round, and Square-toes had
     hopped over. There is no mystery about it at all. I am simply
     applying to ordinary life a few of those precepts of observation and
     deduction which I advocated in that article. Is there anything else
     that puzzles you?"

     "The finger nails and the Trichinopoly," I suggested.

     "The writing on the wall was done with a man's forefinger dipped in
     blood. My glass allowed me to observe that the plaster was slightly
     scratched in doing it, which would not have been the case if the
     man's nail had been trimmed. I gathered up some scattered ash from
     the floor. It was dark in colour and flakey--such an ash as is only
     made by a Trichinopoly. I have made a special study of cigar
     ashes--in fact, I have written a monograph upon the subject. I
     flatter myself that I can distinguish at a glance the ash of any
     known brand, either of cigar or of tobacco. It is just in such
     details that the skilled detective differs from the Gregson and
     Lestrade type."

     "And the florid face?" I asked.

     "Ah, that was a more daring shot, though I have no doubt that I was
     right. You must not ask me that at the present state of the affair."

     I passed my hand over my brow. "My head is in a whirl," I remarked;
     "the more one thinks of it the more mysterious it grows. How came
     these two men--if there were two men--into an empty house? What has
     become of the cabman who drove them? How could one man compel another
     to take poison? Where did the blood come from? What was the object of
     the murderer, since robbery had no part in it? How came the woman's
     ring there? Above all, why should the second man write up the German
     word RACHE before decamping? I confess that I cannot see any possible
     way of reconciling all these facts."

     My companion smiled approvingly.

     "You sum up the difficulties of the situation succinctly and well,"
     he said. "There is much that is still obscure, though I have quite
     made up my mind on the main facts. As to poor Lestrade's discovery it
     was simply a blind intended to put the police upon a wrong track, by
     suggesting Socialism and secret societies. It was not done by a
     German. The A, if you noticed, was printed somewhat after the German
     fashion. Now, a real German invariably prints in the Latin character,
     so that we may safely say that this was not written by one, but by a
     clumsy imitator who overdid his part. It was simply a ruse to divert
     inquiry into a wrong channel. I'm not going to tell you much more of
     the case, Doctor. You know a conjuror gets no credit when once he has
     explained his trick, and if I show you too much of my method of
     working, you will come to the conclusion that I am a very ordinary
     individual after all."

     "I shall never do that," I answered; "you have brought detection as
     near an exact science as it ever will be brought in this world."

     My companion flushed up with pleasure at my words, and the earnest
     way in which I uttered them. I had already observed that he was as
     sensitive to flattery on the score of his art as any girl could be of
     her beauty.

     "I'll tell you one other thing," he said. "Patent-leathers and
     Square-toes came in the same cab, and they walked down the pathway
     together as friendly as possible--arm-in-arm, in all probability.
     When they got inside they walked up and down the room--or rather,
     Patent-leathers stood still while Square-toes walked up and down. I
     could read all that in the dust; and I could read that as he walked
     he grew more and more excited. That is shown by the increased length
     of his strides. He was talking all the while, and working himself up,
     no doubt, into a fury. Then the tragedy occurred. I've told you all I
     know myself now, for the rest is mere surmise and conjecture. We have
     a good working basis, however, on which to start. We must hurry up,
     for I want to go to Halle's concert to hear Norman Neruda this
     afternoon."

     This conversation had occurred while our cab had been threading its
     way through a long succession of dingy streets and dreary by-ways. In
     the dingiest and dreariest of them our driver suddenly came to a
     stand. "That's Audley Court in there," he said, pointing to a narrow
     slit in the line of dead-coloured brick. "You'll find me here when
     you come back."

     Audley Court was not an attractive locality. The narrow passage led
     us into a quadrangle paved with flags and lined by sordid dwellings.
     We picked our way among groups of dirty children, and through lines
     of discoloured linen, until we came to Number 46, the door of which
     was decorated with a small slip of brass on which the name Rance was
     engraved. On enquiry we found that the constable was in bed, and we
     were shown into a little front parlour to await his coming.

     He appeared presently, looking a little irritable at being disturbed
     in his slumbers. "I made my report at the office," he said.

     Holmes took a half-sovereign from his pocket and played with it
     pensively. "We thought that we should like to hear it all from your
     own lips," he said.

     "I shall be most happy to tell you anything I can," the constable
     answered with his eyes upon the little golden disk.

     "Just let us hear it all in your own way as it occurred."

     Rance sat down on the horsehair sofa, and knitted his brows as though
     determined not to omit anything in his narrative.

     "I'll tell it ye from the beginning," he said. "My time is from ten
     at night to six in the morning. At eleven there was a fight at the
     'White Hart'; but bar that all was quiet enough on the beat. At one
     o'clock it began to rain, and I met Harry Murcher--him who has the
     Holland Grove beat--and we stood together at the corner of Henrietta
     Street a-talkin'. Presently--maybe about two or a little after--I
     thought I would take a look round and see that all was right down the
     Brixton Road. It was precious dirty and lonely. Not a soul did I meet
     all the way down, though a cab or two went past me. I was a strollin'
     down, thinkin' between ourselves how uncommon handy a four of gin hot
     would be, when suddenly the glint of a light caught my eye in the
     window of that same house. Now, I knew that them two houses in
     Lauriston Gardens was empty on account of him that owns them who
     won't have the drains seed to, though the very last tenant what lived
     in one of them died o' typhoid fever. I was knocked all in a heap
     therefore at seeing a light in the window, and I suspected as
     something was wrong. When I got to the door--"

     "You stopped, and then walked back to the garden gate," my companion
     interrupted. "What did you do that for?"

     Rance gave a violent jump, and stared at Sherlock Holmes with the
     utmost amazement upon his features.

     "Why, that's true, sir," he said; "though how you come to know it,
     Heaven only knows. Ye see, when I got up to the door it was so still
     and so lonesome, that I thought I'd be none the worse for some one
     with me. I ain't afeared of anything on this side o' the grave; but I
     thought that maybe it was him that died o' the typhoid inspecting the
     drains what killed him. The thought gave me a kind o' turn, and I
     walked back to the gate to see if I could see Murcher's lantern, but
     there wasn't no sign of him nor of anyone else."

     "There was no one in the street?"

     "Not a livin' soul, sir, nor as much as a dog. Then I pulled myself
     together and went back and pushed the door open. All was quiet
     inside, so I went into the room where the light was a-burnin'. There
     was a candle flickerin' on the mantelpiece--a red wax one--and by its
     light I saw--"

     "Yes, I know all that you saw. You walked round the room several
     times, and you knelt down by the body, and then you walked through
     and tried the kitchen door, and then--"

     John Rance sprang to his feet with a frightened face and suspicion in
     his eyes. "Where was you hid to see all that?" he cried. "It seems to
     me that you knows a deal more than you should."

     Holmes laughed and threw his card across the table to the constable.
     "Don't get arresting me for the murder," he said. "I am one of the
     hounds and not the wolf; Mr. Gregson or Mr. Lestrade will answer for
     that. Go on, though. What did you do next?"

     Rance resumed his seat, without however losing his mystified
     expression. "I went back to the gate and sounded my whistle. That
     brought Murcher and two more to the spot."

     "Was the street empty then?"

     "Well, it was, as far as anybody that could be of any good goes."

     "What do you mean?"

     The constable's features broadened into a grin. "I've seen many a
     drunk chap in my time," he said, "but never anyone so cryin' drunk as
     that cove. He was at the gate when I came out, a-leanin' up ag'in the
     railings, and a-singin' at the pitch o' his lungs about Columbine's
     New-fangled Banner, or some such stuff. He couldn't stand, far less
     help."

     "What sort of a man was he?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

     John Rance appeared to be somewhat irritated at this digression. "He
     was an uncommon drunk sort o' man," he said. "He'd ha' found hisself
     in the station if we hadn't been so took up."

     "His face--his dress--didn't you notice them?" Holmes broke in
     impatiently.

     "I should think I did notice them, seeing that I had to prop him
     up--me and Murcher between us. He was a long chap, with a red face,
     the lower part muffled round--"

     "That will do," cried Holmes. "What became of him?"

     "We'd enough to do without lookin' after him," the policeman said, in
     an aggrieved voice. "I'll wager he found his way home all right."

     "How was he dressed?"

     "A brown overcoat."

     "Had he a whip in his hand?"

     "A whip--no."

     "He must have left it behind," muttered my companion. "You didn't
     happen to see or hear a cab after that?"

     "No."

     "There's a half-sovereign for you," my companion said, standing up
     and taking his hat. "I am afraid, Rance, that you will never rise in
     the force. That head of yours should be for use as well as ornament.
     You might have gained your sergeant's stripes last night. The man
     whom you held in your hands is the man who holds the clue of this
     mystery, and whom we are seeking. There is no use of arguing about it
     now; I tell you that it is so. Come along, Doctor."

     We started off for the cab together, leaving our informant
     incredulous, but obviously uncomfortable.

     "The blundering fool," Holmes said, bitterly, as we drove back to our
     lodgings. "Just to think of his having such an incomparable bit of
     good luck, and not taking advantage of it."

     "I am rather in the dark still. It is true that the description of
     this man tallies with your idea of the second party in this mystery.
     But why should he come back to the house after leaving it? That is
     not the way of criminals."

     "The ring, man, the ring: that was what he came back for. If we have
     no other way of catching him, we can always bait our line with the
     ring. I shall have him, Doctor--I'll lay you two to one that I have
     him. I must thank you for it all. I might not have gone but for you,
     and so have missed the finest study I ever came across: a study in
     scarlet, eh? Why shouldn't we use a little art jargon. There's the
     scarlet thread of murder running through the colourless skein of
     life, and our duty is to unravel it, and isolate it, and expose every
     inch of it. And now for lunch, and then for Norman Neruda. Her attack
     and her bowing are splendid. What's that little thing of Chopin's she
     plays so magnificently: Tra-la-la-lira-lira-lay."

     Leaning back in the cab, this amateur bloodhound carolled away like a
     lark while I meditated upon the many-sidedness of the human mind.





          CHAPTER V
          Our Advertisement Brings A Visitor


     Our morning's exertions had been too much for my weak health, and I
     was tired out in the afternoon. After Holmes' departure for the
     concert, I lay down upon the sofa and endeavoured to get a couple of
     hours' sleep. It was a useless attempt. My mind had been too much
     excited by all that had occurred, and the strangest fancies and
     surmises crowded into it. Every time that I closed my eyes I saw
     before me the distorted baboon-like countenance of the murdered man.
     So sinister was the impression which that face had produced upon me
     that I found it difficult to feel anything but gratitude for him who
     had removed its owner from the world. If ever human features bespoke
     vice of the most malignant type, they were certainly those of Enoch
     J. Drebber, of Cleveland. Still I recognized that justice must be
     done, and that the depravity of the victim was no condonement in the
     eyes of the law.

     The more I thought of it the more extraordinary did my companion's
     hypothesis, that the man had been poisoned, appear. I remembered how
     he had sniffed his lips, and had no doubt that he had detected
     something which had given rise to the idea. Then, again, if not
     poison, what had caused the man's death, since there was neither
     wound nor marks of strangulation? But, on the other hand, whose blood
     was that which lay so thickly upon the floor? There were no signs of
     a struggle, nor had the victim any weapon with which he might have
     wounded an antagonist. As long as all these questions were unsolved,
     I felt that sleep would be no easy matter, either for Holmes or
     myself. His quiet self-confident manner convinced me that he had
     already formed a theory which explained all the facts, though what it
     was I could not for an instant conjecture.

     He was very late in returning--so late, that I knew that the concert
     could not have detained him all the time. Dinner was on the table
     before he appeared.

     "It was magnificent," he said, as he took his seat. "Do you remember
     what Darwin says about music? He claims that the power of producing
     and appreciating it existed among the human race long before the
     power of speech was arrived at. Perhaps that is why we are so subtly
     influenced by it. There are vague memories in our souls of those
     misty centuries when the world was in its childhood."

     "That's rather a broad idea," I remarked.

     "One's ideas must be as broad as Nature if they are to interpret
     Nature," he answered. "What's the matter? You're not looking quite
     yourself. This Brixton Road affair has upset you."

     "To tell the truth, it has," I said. "I ought to be more
     case-hardened after my Afghan experiences. I saw my own comrades
     hacked to pieces at Maiwand without losing my nerve."

     "I can understand. There is a mystery about this which stimulates the
     imagination; where there is no imagination there is no horror. Have
     you seen the evening paper?"

     "No."

     "It gives a fairly good account of the affair. It does not mention
     the fact that when the man was raised up, a woman's wedding ring fell
     upon the floor. It is just as well it does not."

     "Why?"

     "Look at this advertisement," he answered. "I had one sent to every
     paper this morning immediately after the affair."

     He threw the paper across to me and I glanced at the place indicated.
     It was the first announcement in the "Found" column. "In Brixton
     Road, this morning," it ran, "a plain gold wedding ring, found in the
     roadway between the 'White Hart' Tavern and Holland Grove. Apply Dr.
     Watson, 221b, Baker Street, between eight and nine this evening."

     "Excuse my using your name," he said. "If I used my own some of these
     dunderheads would recognize it, and want to meddle in the affair."

     "That is all right," I answered. "But supposing anyone applies, I
     have no ring."

     "Oh yes, you have," said he, handing me one. "This will do very well.
     It is almost a facsimile."

     "And who do you expect will answer this advertisement."

     "Why, the man in the brown coat--our florid friend with the square
     toes. If he does not come himself he will send an accomplice."

     "Would he not consider it as too dangerous?"

     "Not at all. If my view of the case is correct, and I have every
     reason to believe that it is, this man would rather risk anything
     than lose the ring. According to my notion he dropped it while
     stooping over Drebber's body, and did not miss it at the time. After
     leaving the house he discovered his loss and hurried back, but found
     the police already in possession, owing to his own folly in leaving
     the candle burning. He had to pretend to be drunk in order to allay
     the suspicions which might have been aroused by his appearance at the
     gate. Now put yourself in that man's place. On thinking the matter
     over, it must have occurred to him that it was possible that he had
     lost the ring in the road after leaving the house. What would he do,
     then? He would eagerly look out for the evening papers in the hope of
     seeing it among the articles found. His eye, of course, would light
     upon this. He would be overjoyed. Why should he fear a trap? There
     would be no reason in his eyes why the finding of the ring should be
     connected with the murder. He would come. He will come. You shall see
     him within an hour."

     "And then?" I asked.

     "Oh, you can leave me to deal with him then. Have you any arms?"

     "I have my old service revolver and a few cartridges."

     "You had better clean it and load it. He will be a desperate man, and
     though I shall take him unawares, it is as well to be ready for
     anything."

     I went to my bedroom and followed his advice. When I returned with
     the pistol the table had been cleared, and Holmes was engaged in his
     favourite occupation of scraping upon his violin.

     "The plot thickens," he said, as I entered; "I have just had an
     answer to my American telegram. My view of the case is the correct
     one."

     "And that is?" I asked eagerly.

     "My fiddle would be the better for new strings," he remarked. "Put
     your pistol in your pocket. When the fellow comes speak to him in an
     ordinary way. Leave the rest to me. Don't frighten him by looking at
     him too hard."

     "It is eight o'clock now," I said, glancing at my watch.

     "Yes. He will probably be here in a few minutes. Open the door
     slightly. That will do. Now put the key on the inside. Thank you!
     This is a queer old book I picked up at a stall yesterday--De Jure
     inter Gentes--published in Latin at Liege in the Lowlands, in 1642.
     Charles' head was still firm on his shoulders when this little
     brown-backed volume was struck off."

     "Who is the printer?"

     "Philippe de Croy, whoever he may have been. On the fly-leaf, in very
     faded ink, is written 'Ex libris Guliolmi Whyte.' I wonder who
     William Whyte was. Some pragmatical seventeenth century lawyer, I
     suppose. His writing has a legal twist about it. Here comes our man,
     I think."

     As he spoke there was a sharp ring at the bell. Sherlock Holmes rose
     softly and moved his chair in the direction of the door. We heard the
     servant pass along the hall, and the sharp click of the latch as she
     opened it.

     "Does Dr. Watson live here?" asked a clear but rather harsh voice. We
     could not hear the servant's reply, but the door closed, and some one
     began to ascend the stairs. The footfall was an uncertain and
     shuffling one. A look of surprise passed over the face of my
     companion as he listened to it. It came slowly along the passage, and
     there was a feeble tap at the door.

     "Come in," I cried.

     At my summons, instead of the man of violence whom we expected, a
     very old and wrinkled woman hobbled into the apartment. She appeared
     to be dazzled by the sudden blaze of light, and after dropping a
     curtsey, she stood blinking at us with her bleared eyes and fumbling
     in her pocket with nervous, shaky fingers. I glanced at my companion,
     and his face had assumed such a disconsolate expression that it was
     all I could do to keep my countenance.

     The old crone drew out an evening paper, and pointed at our
     advertisement. "It's this as has brought me, good gentlemen," she
     said, dropping another curtsey; "a gold wedding ring in the Brixton
     Road. It belongs to my girl Sally, as was married only this time
     twelvemonth, which her husband is steward aboard a Union boat, and
     what he'd say if he comes 'ome and found her without her ring is more
     than I can think, he being short enough at the best o' times, but
     more especially when he has the drink. If it please you, she went to
     the circus last night along with--"

     "Is that her ring?" I asked.

     "The Lord be thanked!" cried the old woman; "Sally will be a glad
     woman this night. That's the ring."

     "And what may your address be?" I inquired, taking up a pencil.

     "13, Duncan Street, Houndsditch. A weary way from here."

     "The Brixton Road does not lie between any circus and Houndsditch,"
     said Sherlock Holmes sharply.

     The old woman faced round and looked keenly at him from her little
     red-rimmed eyes. "The gentleman asked me for my address," she said.
     "Sally lives in lodgings at 3, Mayfield Place, Peckham."

     "And your name is--?"

     "My name is Sawyer--her's is Dennis, which Tom Dennis married
     her--and a smart, clean lad, too, as long as he's at sea, and no
     steward in the company more thought of; but when on shore, what with
     the women and what with liquor shops--"

     "Here is your ring, Mrs. Sawyer," I interrupted, in obedience to a
     sign from my companion; "it clearly belongs to your daughter, and I
     am glad to be able to restore it to the rightful owner."

     With many mumbled blessings and protestations of gratitude the old
     crone packed it away in her pocket, and shuffled off down the stairs.
     Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet the moment that she was gone and
     rushed into his room. He returned in a few seconds enveloped in an
     ulster and a cravat. "I'll follow her," he said, hurriedly; "she must
     be an accomplice, and will lead me to him. Wait up for me." The hall
     door had hardly slammed behind our visitor before Holmes had
     descended the stair. Looking through the window I could see her
     walking feebly along the other side, while her pursuer dogged her
     some little distance behind. "Either his whole theory is incorrect,"
     I thought to myself, "or else he will be led now to the heart of the
     mystery." There was no need for him to ask me to wait up for him, for
     I felt that sleep was impossible until I heard the result of his
     adventure.

     It was close upon nine when he set out. I had no idea how long he
     might be, but I sat stolidly puffing at my pipe and skipping over the
     pages of Henri Murger's Vie de Bohme. Ten o'clock passed, and I
     heard the footsteps of the maid as they pattered off to bed. Eleven,
     and the more stately tread of the landlady passed my door, bound for
     the same destination. It was close upon twelve before I heard the
     sharp sound of his latch-key. The instant he entered I saw by his
     face that he had not been successful. Amusement and chagrin seemed to
     be struggling for the mastery, until the former suddenly carried the
     day, and he burst into a hearty laugh.

     "I wouldn't have the Scotland Yarders know it for the world," he
     cried, dropping into his chair; "I have chaffed them so much that
     they would never have let me hear the end of it. I can afford to
     laugh, because I know that I will be even with them in the long run."

     "What is it then?" I asked.

     "Oh, I don't mind telling a story against myself. That creature had
     gone a little way when she began to limp and show every sign of being
     foot-sore. Presently she came to a halt, and hailed a four-wheeler
     which was passing. I managed to be close to her so as to hear the
     address, but I need not have been so anxious, for she sang it out
     loud enough to be heard at the other side of the street, 'Drive to
     13, Duncan Street, Houndsditch,' she cried. This begins to look
     genuine, I thought, and having seen her safely inside, I perched
     myself behind. That's an art which every detective should be an
     expert at. Well, away we rattled, and never drew rein until we
     reached the street in question. I hopped off before we came to the
     door, and strolled down the street in an easy, lounging way. I saw
     the cab pull up. The driver jumped down, and I saw him open the door
     and stand expectantly. Nothing came out though. When I reached him he
     was groping about frantically in the empty cab, and giving vent to
     the finest assorted collection of oaths that ever I listened to.
     There was no sign or trace of his passenger, and I fear it will be
     some time before he gets his fare. On inquiring at Number 13 we found
     that the house belonged to a respectable paperhanger, named Keswick,
     and that no one of the name either of Sawyer or Dennis had ever been
     heard of there."

     "You don't mean to say," I cried, in amazement, "that that tottering,
     feeble old woman was able to get out of the cab while it was in
     motion, without either you or the driver seeing her?"

     "Old woman be damned!" said Sherlock Holmes, sharply. "We were the
     old women to be so taken in. It must have been a young man, and an
     active one, too, besides being an incomparable actor. The get-up was
     inimitable. He saw that he was followed, no doubt, and used this
     means of giving me the slip. It shows that the man we are after is
     not as lonely as I imagined he was, but has friends who are ready to
     risk something for him. Now, Doctor, you are looking done-up. Take my
     advice and turn in."

     I was certainly feeling very weary, so I obeyed his injunction. I
     left Holmes seated in front of the smouldering fire, and long into
     the watches of the night I heard the low, melancholy wailings of his
     violin, and knew that he was still pondering over the strange problem
     which he had set himself to unravel.





          CHAPTER VI
          Tobias Gregson Shows What He Can Do


     The papers next day were full of the "Brixton Mystery," as they
     termed it. Each had a long account of the affair, and some had
     leaders upon it in addition. There was some information in them which
     was new to me. I still retain in my scrap-book numerous clippings and
     extracts bearing upon the case. Here is a condensation of a few of
     them:--

     The Daily Telegraph remarked that in the history of crime there had
     seldom been a tragedy which presented stranger features. The German
     name of the victim, the absence of all other motive, and the sinister
     inscription on the wall, all pointed to its perpetration by political
     refugees and revolutionists. The Socialists had many branches in
     America, and the deceased had, no doubt, infringed their unwritten
     laws, and been tracked down by them. After alluding airily to the
     Vehmgericht, aqua tofana, Carbonari, the Marchioness de Brinvilliers,
     the Darwinian theory, the principles of Malthus, and the Ratcliff
     Highway murders, the article concluded by admonishing the Government
     and advocating a closer watch over foreigners in England.

     The Standard commented upon the fact that lawless outrages of the
     sort usually occurred under a Liberal Administration. They arose from
     the unsettling of the minds of the masses, and the consequent
     weakening of all authority. The deceased was an American gentleman
     who had been residing for some weeks in the Metropolis. He had stayed
     at the boarding-house of Madame Charpentier, in Torquay Terrace,
     Camberwell. He was accompanied in his travels by his private
     secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson. The two bade adieu to their
     landlady upon Tuesday, the 4th inst., and departed to Euston Station
     with the avowed intention of catching the Liverpool express. They
     were afterwards seen together upon the platform. Nothing more is
     known of them until Mr. Drebber's body was, as recorded, discovered
     in an empty house in the Brixton Road, many miles from Euston. How he
     came there, or how he met his fate, are questions which are still
     involved in mystery. Nothing is known of the whereabouts of
     Stangerson. We are glad to learn that Mr. Lestrade and Mr. Gregson,
     of Scotland Yard, are both engaged upon the case, and it is
     confidently anticipated that these well-known officers will speedily
     throw light upon the matter.

     The Daily News observed that there was no doubt as to the crime being
     a political one. The despotism and hatred of Liberalism which
     animated the Continental Governments had had the effect of driving to
     our shores a number of men who might have made excellent citizens
     were they not soured by the recollection of all that they had
     undergone. Among these men there was a stringent code of honour, any
     infringement of which was punished by death. Every effort should be
     made to find the secretary, Stangerson, and to ascertain some
     particulars of the habits of the deceased. A great step had been
     gained by the discovery of the address of the house at which he had
     boarded--a result which was entirely due to the acuteness and energy
     of Mr. Gregson of Scotland Yard.

     Sherlock Holmes and I read these notices over together at breakfast,
     and they appeared to afford him considerable amusement.

     "I told you that, whatever happened, Lestrade and Gregson would be
     sure to score."

     "That depends on how it turns out."

     "Oh, bless you, it doesn't matter in the least. If the man is caught,
     it will be on account of their exertions; if he escapes, it will be
     in spite of their exertions. It's heads I win and tails you lose.
     Whatever they do, they will have followers. 'Un sot trouve toujours
     un plus sot qui l'admire.'"

     "What on earth is this?" I cried, for at this moment there came the
     pattering of many steps in the hall and on the stairs, accompanied by
     audible expressions of disgust upon the part of our landlady.

     "It's the Baker Street division of the detective police force," said
     my companion, gravely; and as he spoke there rushed into the room
     half a dozen of the dirtiest and most ragged street Arabs that ever I
     clapped eyes on.

     "'Tention!" cried Holmes, in a sharp tone, and the six dirty little
     scoundrels stood in a line like so many disreputable statuettes. "In
     future you shall send up Wiggins alone to report, and the rest of you
     must wait in the street. Have you found it, Wiggins?"

     "No, sir, we hain't," said one of the youths.

     "I hardly expected you would. You must keep on until you do. Here are
     your wages." He handed each of them a shilling. "Now, off you go, and
     come back with a better report next time."

     He waved his hand, and they scampered away downstairs like so many
     rats, and we heard their shrill voices next moment in the street.

     "There's more work to be got out of one of those little beggars than
     out of a dozen of the force," Holmes remarked. "The mere sight of an
     official-looking person seals men's lips. These youngsters, however,
     go everywhere and hear everything. They are as sharp as needles, too;
     all they want is organisation."

     "Is it on this Brixton case that you are employing them?" I asked.

     "Yes; there is a point which I wish to ascertain. It is merely a
     matter of time. Hullo! we are going to hear some news now with a
     vengeance! Here is Gregson coming down the road with beatitude
     written upon every feature of his face. Bound for us, I know. Yes, he
     is stopping. There he is!"

     There was a violent peal at the bell, and in a few seconds the
     fair-haired detective came up the stairs, three steps at a time, and
     burst into our sitting-room.

     "My dear fellow," he cried, wringing Holmes' unresponsive hand,
     "congratulate me! I have made the whole thing as clear as day."

     A shade of anxiety seemed to me to cross my companion's expressive
     face.

     "Do you mean that you are on the right track?" he asked.

     "The right track! Why, sir, we have the man under lock and key."

     "And his name is?"

     "Arthur Charpentier, sub-lieutenant in Her Majesty's navy," cried
     Gregson, pompously, rubbing his fat hands and inflating his chest.

     Sherlock Holmes gave a sigh of relief, and relaxed into a smile.

     "Take a seat, and try one of these cigars," he said. "We are anxious
     to know how you managed it. Will you have some whiskey and water?"

     "I don't mind if I do," the detective answered. "The tremendous
     exertions which I have gone through during the last day or two have
     worn me out. Not so much bodily exertion, you understand, as the
     strain upon the mind. You will appreciate that, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,
     for we are both brain-workers."

     "You do me too much honour," said Holmes, gravely. "Let us hear how
     you arrived at this most gratifying result."

     The detective seated himself in the arm-chair, and puffed
     complacently at his cigar. Then suddenly he slapped his thigh in a
     paroxysm of amusement.

     "The fun of it is," he cried, "that that fool Lestrade, who thinks
     himself so smart, has gone off upon the wrong track altogether. He is
     after the secretary Stangerson, who had no more to do with the crime
     than the babe unborn. I have no doubt that he has caught him by this
     time."

     The idea tickled Gregson so much that he laughed until he choked.

     "And how did you get your clue?"

     "Ah, I'll tell you all about it. Of course, Doctor Watson, this is
     strictly between ourselves. The first difficulty which we had to
     contend with was the finding of this American's antecedents. Some
     people would have waited until their advertisements were answered, or
     until parties came forward and volunteered information. That is not
     Tobias Gregson's way of going to work. You remember the hat beside
     the dead man?"

     "Yes," said Holmes; "by John Underwood and Sons, 129, Camberwell
     Road."

     Gregson looked quite crest-fallen.

     "I had no idea that you noticed that," he said. "Have you been
     there?"

     "No."

     "Ha!" cried Gregson, in a relieved voice; "you should never neglect a
     chance, however small it may seem."

     "To a great mind, nothing is little," remarked Holmes, sententiously.

     "Well, I went to Underwood, and asked him if he had sold a hat of
     that size and description. He looked over his books, and came on it
     at once. He had sent the hat to a Mr. Drebber, residing at
     Charpentier's Boarding Establishment, Torquay Terrace. Thus I got at
     his address."

     "Smart--very smart!" murmured Sherlock Holmes.

     "I next called upon Madame Charpentier," continued the detective. "I
     found her very pale and distressed. Her daughter was in the room,
     too--an uncommonly fine girl she is, too; she was looking red about
     the eyes and her lips trembled as I spoke to her. That didn't escape
     my notice. I began to smell a rat. You know the feeling, Mr. Sherlock
     Holmes, when you come upon the right scent--a kind of thrill in your
     nerves. 'Have you heard of the mysterious death of your late boarder
     Mr. Enoch J. Drebber, of Cleveland?' I asked.

     "The mother nodded. She didn't seem able to get out a word. The
     daughter burst into tears. I felt more than ever that these people
     knew something of the matter.

     "'At what o'clock did Mr. Drebber leave your house for the train?' I
     asked.

     "'At eight o'clock,' she said, gulping in her throat to keep down her
     agitation. 'His secretary, Mr. Stangerson, said that there were two
     trains--one at 9.15 and one at 11. He was to catch the first.'

     "'And was that the last which you saw of him?'

     "A terrible change came over the woman's face as I asked the
     question. Her features turned perfectly livid. It was some seconds
     before she could get out the single word 'Yes'--and when it did come
     it was in a husky unnatural tone.

     "There was silence for a moment, and then the daughter spoke in a
     calm clear voice.

     "'No good can ever come of falsehood, mother,' she said. 'Let us be
     frank with this gentleman. We did see Mr. Drebber again.'

     "'God forgive you!' cried Madame Charpentier, throwing up her hands
     and sinking back in her chair. 'You have murdered your brother.'

     "'Arthur would rather that we spoke the truth,' the girl answered
     firmly.

     "'You had best tell me all about it now,' I said. 'Half-confidences
     are worse than none. Besides, you do not know how much we know of
     it.'

     "'On your head be it, Alice!' cried her mother; and then, turning to
     me, 'I will tell you all, sir. Do not imagine that my agitation on
     behalf of my son arises from any fear lest he should have had a hand
     in this terrible affair. He is utterly innocent of it. My dread is,
     however, that in your eyes and in the eyes of others he may appear to
     be compromised. That however is surely impossible. His high
     character, his profession, his antecedents would all forbid it.'

     "'Your best way is to make a clean breast of the facts,' I answered.
     'Depend upon it, if your son is innocent he will be none the worse.'

     "'Perhaps, Alice, you had better leave us together,' she said, and
     her daughter withdrew. 'Now, sir,' she continued, 'I had no intention
     of telling you all this, but since my poor daughter has disclosed it
     I have no alternative. Having once decided to speak, I will tell you
     all without omitting any particular.'

     "'It is your wisest course,' said I.

     "'Mr. Drebber has been with us nearly three weeks. He and his
     secretary, Mr. Stangerson, had been travelling on the Continent. I
     noticed a "Copenhagen" label upon each of their trunks, showing that
     that had been their last stopping place. Stangerson was a quiet
     reserved man, but his employer, I am sorry to say, was far otherwise.
     He was coarse in his habits and brutish in his ways. The very night
     of his arrival he became very much the worse for drink, and, indeed,
     after twelve o'clock in the day he could hardly ever be said to be
     sober. His manners towards the maid-servants were disgustingly free
     and familiar. Worst of all, he speedily assumed the same attitude
     towards my daughter, Alice, and spoke to her more than once in a way
     which, fortunately, she is too innocent to understand. On one
     occasion he actually seized her in his arms and embraced her--an
     outrage which caused his own secretary to reproach him for his
     unmanly conduct.'

     "'But why did you stand all this,' I asked. 'I suppose that you can
     get rid of your boarders when you wish.'

     "Mrs. Charpentier blushed at my pertinent question. 'Would to God
     that I had given him notice on the very day that he came,' she said.
     'But it was a sore temptation. They were paying a pound a day
     each--fourteen pounds a week, and this is the slack season. I am a
     widow, and my boy in the Navy has cost me much. I grudged to lose the
     money. I acted for the best. This last was too much, however, and I
     gave him notice to leave on account of it. That was the reason of his
     going.'

     "'Well?'

     "'My heart grew light when I saw him drive away. My son is on leave
     just now, but I did not tell him anything of all this, for his temper
     is violent, and he is passionately fond of his sister. When I closed
     the door behind them a load seemed to be lifted from my mind. Alas,
     in less than an hour there was a ring at the bell, and I learned that
     Mr. Drebber had returned. He was much excited, and evidently the
     worse for drink. He forced his way into the room, where I was sitting
     with my daughter, and made some incoherent remark about having missed
     his train. He then turned to Alice, and before my very face, proposed
     to her that she should fly with him. "You are of age," he said, "and
     there is no law to stop you. I have money enough and to spare. Never
     mind the old girl here, but come along with me now straight away. You
     shall live like a princess." Poor Alice was so frightened that she
     shrunk away from him, but he caught her by the wrist and endeavoured
     to draw her towards the door. I screamed, and at that moment my son
     Arthur came into the room. What happened then I do not know. I heard
     oaths and the confused sounds of a scuffle. I was too terrified to
     raise my head. When I did look up I saw Arthur standing in the
     doorway laughing, with a stick in his hand. "I don't think that fine
     fellow will trouble us again," he said. "I will just go after him and
     see what he does with himself." With those words he took his hat and
     started off down the street. The next morning we heard of Mr.
     Drebber's mysterious death.'

     "This statement came from Mrs. Charpentier's lips with many gasps and
     pauses. At times she spoke so low that I could hardly catch the
     words. I made shorthand notes of all that she said, however, so that
     there should be no possibility of a mistake."

     "It's quite exciting," said Sherlock Holmes, with a yawn. "What
     happened next?"

     "When Mrs. Charpentier paused," the detective continued, "I saw that
     the whole case hung upon one point. Fixing her with my eye in a way
     which I always found effective with women, I asked her at what hour
     her son returned.

     "'I do not know,' she answered.

     "'Not know?'

     "'No; he has a latch-key, and he let himself in.'

     "'After you went to bed?'

     "'Yes.'

     "'When did you go to bed?'

     "'About eleven.'

     "'So your son was gone at least two hours?'

     "'Yes.'

     "'Possibly four or five?'

     "'Yes.'

     "'What was he doing during that time?'

     "'I do not know,' she answered, turning white to her very lips.

     "Of course after that there was nothing more to be done. I found out
     where Lieutenant Charpentier was, took two officers with me, and
     arrested him. When I touched him on the shoulder and warned him to
     come quietly with us, he answered us as bold as brass, 'I suppose you
     are arresting me for being concerned in the death of that scoundrel
     Drebber,' he said. We had said nothing to him about it, so that his
     alluding to it had a most suspicious aspect."

     "Very," said Holmes.

     "He still carried the heavy stick which the mother described him as
     having with him when he followed Drebber. It was a stout oak cudgel."

     "What is your theory, then?"

     "Well, my theory is that he followed Drebber as far as the Brixton
     Road. When there, a fresh altercation arose between them, in the
     course of which Drebber received a blow from the stick, in the pit of
     the stomach, perhaps, which killed him without leaving any mark. The
     night was so wet that no one was about, so Charpentier dragged the
     body of his victim into the empty house. As to the candle, and the
     blood, and the writing on the wall, and the ring, they may all be so
     many tricks to throw the police on to the wrong scent."

     "Well done!" said Holmes in an encouraging voice. "Really, Gregson,
     you are getting along. We shall make something of you yet."

     "I flatter myself that I have managed it rather neatly," the
     detective answered proudly. "The young man volunteered a statement,
     in which he said that after following Drebber some time, the latter
     perceived him, and took a cab in order to get away from him. On his
     way home he met an old shipmate, and took a long walk with him. On
     being asked where this old shipmate lived, he was unable to give any
     satisfactory reply. I think the whole case fits together uncommonly
     well. What amuses me is to think of Lestrade, who had started off
     upon the wrong scent. I am afraid he won't make much of--Why, by
     Jove, here's the very man himself!"

     It was indeed Lestrade, who had ascended the stairs while we were
     talking, and who now entered the room. The assurance and jauntiness
     which generally marked his demeanour and dress were, however,
     wanting. His face was disturbed and troubled, while his clothes were
     disarranged and untidy. He had evidently come with the intention of
     consulting with Sherlock Holmes, for on perceiving his colleague he
     appeared to be embarrassed and put out. He stood in the centre of the
     room, fumbling nervously with his hat and uncertain what to do. "This
     is a most extraordinary case," he said at last--"a most
     incomprehensible affair."

     "Ah, you find it so, Mr. Lestrade!" cried Gregson, triumphantly. "I
     thought you would come to that conclusion. Have you managed to find
     the Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson?"

     "The Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson," said Lestrade gravely, "was
     murdered at Halliday's Private Hotel about six o'clock this morning."
     





          CHAPTER VII
          Light In The Darkness


     The intelligence with which Lestrade greeted us was so momentous and
     so unexpected, that we were all three fairly dumbfounded. Gregson
     sprang out of his chair and upset the remainder of his whiskey and
     water. I stared in silence at Sherlock Holmes, whose lips were
     compressed and his brows drawn down over his eyes.

     "Stangerson too!" he muttered. "The plot thickens."

     "It was quite thick enough before," grumbled Lestrade, taking a
     chair. "I seem to have dropped into a sort of council of war."

     "Are you--are you sure of this piece of intelligence?" stammered
     Gregson.

     "I have just come from his room," said Lestrade. "I was the first to
     discover what had occurred."

     "We have been hearing Gregson's view of the matter," Holmes observed.
     "Would you mind letting us know what you have seen and done?"

     "I have no objection," Lestrade answered, seating himself. "I freely
     confess that I was of the opinion that Stangerson was concerned in
     the death of Drebber. This fresh development has shown me that I was
     completely mistaken. Full of the one idea, I set myself to find out
     what had become of the Secretary. They had been seen together at
     Euston Station about half-past eight on the evening of the third. At
     two in the morning Drebber had been found in the Brixton Road. The
     question which confronted me was to find out how Stangerson had been
     employed between 8.30 and the time of the crime, and what had become
     of him afterwards. I telegraphed to Liverpool, giving a description
     of the man, and warning them to keep a watch upon the American boats.
     I then set to work calling upon all the hotels and lodging-houses in
     the vicinity of Euston. You see, I argued that if Drebber and his
     companion had become separated, the natural course for the latter
     would be to put up somewhere in the vicinity for the night, and then
     to hang about the station again next morning."

     "They would be likely to agree on some meeting-place beforehand,"
     remarked Holmes.

     "So it proved. I spent the whole of yesterday evening in making
     enquiries entirely without avail. This morning I began very early,
     and at eight o'clock I reached Halliday's Private Hotel, in Little
     George Street. On my enquiry as to whether a Mr. Stangerson was
     living there, they at once answered me in the affirmative.

     "'No doubt you are the gentleman whom he was expecting,' they said.
     'He has been waiting for a gentleman for two days.'

     "'Where is he now?' I asked.

     "'He is upstairs in bed. He wished to be called at nine.'

     "'I will go up and see him at once,' I said.

     "It seemed to me that my sudden appearance might shake his nerves and
     lead him to say something unguarded. The Boots volunteered to show me
     the room: it was on the second floor, and there was a small corridor
     leading up to it. The Boots pointed out the door to me, and was about
     to go downstairs again when I saw something that made me feel
     sickish, in spite of my twenty years' experience. From under the door
     there curled a little red ribbon of blood, which had meandered across
     the passage and formed a little pool along the skirting at the other
     side. I gave a cry, which brought the Boots back. He nearly fainted
     when he saw it. The door was locked on the inside, but we put our
     shoulders to it, and knocked it in. The window of the room was open,
     and beside the window, all huddled up, lay the body of a man in his
     nightdress. He was quite dead, and had been for some time, for his
     limbs were rigid and cold. When we turned him over, the Boots
     recognized him at once as being the same gentleman who had engaged
     the room under the name of Joseph Stangerson. The cause of death was
     a deep stab in the left side, which must have penetrated the heart.
     And now comes the strangest part of the affair. What do you suppose
     was above the murdered man?"

     I felt a creeping of the flesh, and a presentiment of coming horror,
     even before Sherlock Holmes answered.

     "The word RACHE, written in letters of blood," he said.

     "That was it," said Lestrade, in an awe-struck voice; and we were all
     silent for a while.

     There was something so methodical and so incomprehensible about the
     deeds of this unknown assassin, that it imparted a fresh ghastliness
     to his crimes. My nerves, which were steady enough on the field of
     battle tingled as I thought of it.

     "The man was seen," continued Lestrade. "A milk boy, passing on his
     way to the dairy, happened to walk down the lane which leads from the
     mews at the back of the hotel. He noticed that a ladder, which
     usually lay there, was raised against one of the windows of the
     second floor, which was wide open. After passing, he looked back and
     saw a man descend the ladder. He came down so quietly and openly that
     the boy imagined him to be some carpenter or joiner at work in the
     hotel. He took no particular notice of him, beyond thinking in his
     own mind that it was early for him to be at work. He has an
     impression that the man was tall, had a reddish face, and was dressed
     in a long, brownish coat. He must have stayed in the room some little
     time after the murder, for we found blood-stained water in the basin,
     where he had washed his hands, and marks on the sheets where he had
     deliberately wiped his knife."

     I glanced at Holmes on hearing the description of the murderer, which
     tallied so exactly with his own. There was, however, no trace of
     exultation or satisfaction upon his face.

     "Did you find nothing in the room which could furnish a clue to the
     murderer?" he asked.

     "Nothing. Stangerson had Drebber's purse in his pocket, but it seems
     that this was usual, as he did all the paying. There was eighty odd
     pounds in it, but nothing had been taken. Whatever the motives of
     these extraordinary crimes, robbery is certainly not one of them.
     There were no papers or memoranda in the murdered man's pocket,
     except a single telegram, dated from Cleveland about a month ago, and
     containing the words, 'J. H. is in Europe.' There was no name
     appended to this message."

     "And there was nothing else?" Holmes asked.

     "Nothing of any importance. The man's novel, with which he had read
     himself to sleep was lying upon the bed, and his pipe was on a chair
     beside him. There was a glass of water on the table, and on the
     window-sill a small chip ointment box containing a couple of pills."

     Sherlock Holmes sprang from his chair with an exclamation of delight.

     "The last link," he cried, exultantly. "My case is complete."

     The two detectives stared at him in amazement.

     "I have now in my hands," my companion said, confidently, "all the
     threads which have formed such a tangle. There are, of course,
     details to be filled in, but I am as certain of all the main facts,
     from the time that Drebber parted from Stangerson at the station, up
     to the discovery of the body of the latter, as if I had seen them
     with my own eyes. I will give you a proof of my knowledge. Could you
     lay your hand upon those pills?"

     "I have them," said Lestrade, producing a small white box; "I took
     them and the purse and the telegram, intending to have them put in a
     place of safety at the Police Station. It was the merest chance my
     taking these pills, for I am bound to say that I do not attach any
     importance to them."

     "Give them here," said Holmes. "Now, Doctor," turning to me, "are
     those ordinary pills?"

     They certainly were not. They were of a pearly grey colour, small,
     round, and almost transparent against the light. "From their
     lightness and transparency, I should imagine that they are soluble in
     water," I remarked.

     "Precisely so," answered Holmes. "Now would you mind going down and
     fetching that poor little devil of a terrier which has been bad so
     long, and which the landlady wanted you to put out of its pain
     yesterday."

     I went downstairs and carried the dog upstair in my arms. It's
     laboured breathing and glazing eye showed that it was not far from
     its end. Indeed, its snow-white muzzle proclaimed that it had already
     exceeded the usual term of canine existence. I placed it upon a
     cushion on the rug.

     "I will now cut one of these pills in two," said Holmes, and drawing
     his penknife he suited the action to the word. "One half we return
     into the box for future purposes. The other half I will place in this
     wine glass, in which is a teaspoonful of water. You perceive that our
     friend, the Doctor, is right, and that it readily dissolves."

     "This may be very interesting," said Lestrade, in the injured tone of
     one who suspects that he is being laughed at, "I cannot see, however,
     what it has to do with the death of Mr. Joseph Stangerson."

     "Patience, my friend, patience! You will find in time that it has
     everything to do with it. I shall now add a little milk to make the
     mixture palatable, and on presenting it to the dog we find that he
     laps it up readily enough."

     As he spoke he turned the contents of the wine glass into a saucer
     and placed it in front of the terrier, who speedily licked it dry.
     Sherlock Holmes' earnest demeanour had so far convinced us that we
     all sat in silence, watching the animal intently, and expecting some
     startling effect. None such appeared, however. The dog continued to
     lie stretched upon the cushion, breathing in a laboured way, but
     apparently neither the better nor the worse for its draught.

     Holmes had taken out his watch, and as minute followed minute without
     result, an expression of the utmost chagrin and disappointment
     appeared upon his features. He gnawed his lip, drummed his fingers
     upon the table, and showed every other symptom of acute impatience.
     So great was his emotion, that I felt sincerely sorry for him, while
     the two detectives smiled derisively, by no means displeased at this
     check which he had met.

     "It can't be a coincidence," he cried, at last springing from his
     chair and pacing wildly up and down the room; "it is impossible that
     it should be a mere coincidence. The very pills which I suspected in
     the case of Drebber are actually found after the death of Stangerson.
     And yet they are inert. What can it mean? Surely my whole chain of
     reasoning cannot have been false. It is impossible! And yet this
     wretched dog is none the worse. Ah, I have it! I have it!" With a
     perfect shriek of delight he rushed to the box, cut the other pill in
     two, dissolved it, added milk, and presented it to the terrier. The
     unfortunate creature's tongue seemed hardly to have been moistened in
     it before it gave a convulsive shiver in every limb, and lay as rigid
     and lifeless as if it had been struck by lightning.

     Sherlock Holmes drew a long breath, and wiped the perspiration from
     his forehead. "I should have more faith," he said; "I ought to know
     by this time that when a fact appears to be opposed to a long train
     of deductions, it invariably proves to be capable of bearing some
     other interpretation. Of the two pills in that box one was of the
     most deadly poison, and the other was entirely harmless. I ought to
     have known that before ever I saw the box at all."

     This last statement appeared to me to be so startling, that I could
     hardly believe that he was in his sober senses. There was the dead
     dog, however, to prove that his conjecture had been correct. It
     seemed to me that the mists in my own mind were gradually clearing
     away, and I began to have a dim, vague perception of the truth.

     "All this seems strange to you," continued Holmes, "because you
     failed at the beginning of the inquiry to grasp the importance of the
     single real clue which was presented to you. I had the good fortune
     to seize upon that, and everything which has occurred since then has
     served to confirm my original supposition, and, indeed, was the
     logical sequence of it. Hence things which have perplexed you and
     made the case more obscure, have served to enlighten me and to
     strengthen my conclusions. It is a mistake to confound strangeness
     with mystery. The most commonplace crime is often the most mysterious
     because it presents no new or special features from which deductions
     may be drawn. This murder would have been infinitely more difficult
     to unravel had the body of the victim been simply found lying in the
     roadway without any of those outr and sensational accompaniments
     which have rendered it remarkable. These strange details, far from
     making the case more difficult, have really had the effect of making
     it less so."

     Mr. Gregson, who had listened to this address with considerable
     impatience, could contain himself no longer. "Look here, Mr. Sherlock
     Holmes," he said, "we are all ready to acknowledge that you are a
     smart man, and that you have your own methods of working. We want
     something more than mere theory and preaching now, though. It is a
     case of taking the man. I have made my case out, and it seems I was
     wrong. Young Charpentier could not have been engaged in this second
     affair. Lestrade went after his man, Stangerson, and it appears that
     he was wrong too. You have thrown out hints here, and hints there,
     and seem to know more than we do, but the time has come when we feel
     that we have a right to ask you straight how much you do know of the
     business. Can you name the man who did it?"

     "I cannot help feeling that Gregson is right, sir," remarked
     Lestrade. "We have both tried, and we have both failed. You have
     remarked more than once since I have been in the room that you had
     all the evidence which you require. Surely you will not withhold it
     any longer."

     "Any delay in arresting the assassin," I observed, "might give him
     time to perpetrate some fresh atrocity."

     Thus pressed by us all, Holmes showed signs of irresolution. He
     continued to walk up and down the room with his head sunk on his
     chest and his brows drawn down, as was his habit when lost in
     thought.

     "There will be no more murders," he said at last, stopping abruptly
     and facing us. "You can put that consideration out of the question.
     You have asked me if I know the name of the assassin. I do. The mere
     knowing of his name is a small thing, however, compared with the
     power of laying our hands upon him. This I expect very shortly to do.
     I have good hopes of managing it through my own arrangements; but it
     is a thing which needs delicate handling, for we have a shrewd and
     desperate man to deal with, who is supported, as I have had occasion
     to prove, by another who is as clever as himself. As long as this man
     has no idea that anyone can have a clue there is some chance of
     securing him; but if he had the slightest suspicion, he would change
     his name, and vanish in an instant among the four million inhabitants
     of this great city. Without meaning to hurt either of your feelings,
     I am bound to say that I consider these men to be more than a match
     for the official force, and that is why I have not asked your
     assistance. If I fail I shall, of course, incur all the blame due to
     this omission; but that I am prepared for. At present I am ready to
     promise that the instant that I can communicate with you without
     endangering my own combinations, I shall do so."

     Gregson and Lestrade seemed to be far from satisfied by this
     assurance, or by the depreciating allusion to the detective police.
     The former had flushed up to the roots of his flaxen hair, while the
     other's beady eyes glistened with curiosity and resentment. Neither
     of them had time to speak, however, before there was a tap at the
     door, and the spokesman of the street Arabs, young Wiggins,
     introduced his insignificant and unsavoury person.

     "Please, sir," he said, touching his forelock, "I have the cab
     downstairs."

     "Good boy," said Holmes, blandly. "Why don't you introduce this
     pattern at Scotland Yard?" he continued, taking a pair of steel
     handcuffs from a drawer. "See how beautifully the spring works. They
     fasten in an instant."

     "The old pattern is good enough," remarked Lestrade, "if we can only
     find the man to put them on."

     "Very good, very good," said Holmes, smiling. "The cabman may as well
     help me with my boxes. Just ask him to step up, Wiggins."

     I was surprised to find my companion speaking as though he were about
     to set out on a journey, since he had not said anything to me about
     it. There was a small portmanteau in the room, and this he pulled out
     and began to strap. He was busily engaged at it when the cabman
     entered the room.

     "Just give me a help with this buckle, cabman," he said, kneeling
     over his task, and never turning his head.

     The fellow came forward with a somewhat sullen, defiant air, and put
     down his hands to assist. At that instant there was a sharp click,
     the jangling of metal, and Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet again.

     "Gentlemen," he cried, with flashing eyes, "let me introduce you to
     Mr. Jefferson Hope, the murderer of Enoch Drebber and of Joseph
     Stangerson."

     The whole thing occurred in a moment--so quickly that I had no time
     to realize it. I have a vivid recollection of that instant, of
     Holmes' triumphant expression and the ring of his voice, of the
     cabman's dazed, savage face, as he glared at the glittering
     handcuffs, which had appeared as if by magic upon his wrists. For a
     second or two we might have been a group of statues. Then, with an
     inarticulate roar of fury, the prisoner wrenched himself free from
     Holmes's grasp, and hurled himself through the window. Woodwork and
     glass gave way before him; but before he got quite through, Gregson,
     Lestrade, and Holmes sprang upon him like so many staghounds. He was
     dragged back into the room, and then commenced a terrific conflict.
     So powerful and so fierce was he, that the four of us were shaken off
     again and again. He appeared to have the convulsive strength of a man
     in an epileptic fit. His face and hands were terribly mangled by his
     passage through the glass, but loss of blood had no effect in
     diminishing his resistance. It was not until Lestrade succeeded in
     getting his hand inside his neckcloth and half-strangling him that we
     made him realize that his struggles were of no avail; and even then
     we felt no security until we had pinioned his feet as well as his
     hands. That done, we rose to our feet breathless and panting.

     "We have his cab," said Sherlock Holmes. "It will serve to take him
     to Scotland Yard. And now, gentlemen," he continued, with a pleasant
     smile, "we have reached the end of our little mystery. You are very
     welcome to put any questions that you like to me now, and there is no
     danger that I will refuse to answer them."









                                      PART II

                           The Country of the Saints.





          CHAPTER I
          On The Great Alkali Plain


     In the central portion of the great North American Continent there
     lies an arid and repulsive desert, which for many a long year served
     as a barrier against the advance of civilisation. From the Sierra
     Nevada to Nebraska, and from the Yellowstone River in the north to
     the Colorado upon the south, is a region of desolation and silence.
     Nor is Nature always in one mood throughout this grim district. It
     comprises snow-capped and lofty mountains, and dark and gloomy
     valleys. There are swift-flowing rivers which dash through jagged
     caons; and there are enormous plains, which in winter are white with
     snow, and in summer are grey with the saline alkali dust. They all
     preserve, however, the common characteristics of barrenness,
     inhospitality, and misery.

     There are no inhabitants of this land of despair. A band of Pawnees
     or of Blackfeet may occasionally traverse it in order to reach other
     hunting-grounds, but the hardiest of the braves are glad to lose
     sight of those awesome plains, and to find themselves once more upon
     their prairies. The coyote skulks among the scrub, the buzzard flaps
     heavily through the air, and the clumsy grizzly bear lumbers through
     the dark ravines, and picks up such sustenance as it can amongst the
     rocks. These are the sole dwellers in the wilderness.

     In the whole world there can be no more dreary view than that from
     the northern slope of the Sierra Blanco. As far as the eye can reach
     stretches the great flat plain-land, all dusted over with patches of
     alkali, and intersected by clumps of the dwarfish chaparral bushes.
     On the extreme verge of the horizon lie a long chain of mountain
     peaks, with their rugged summits flecked with snow. In this great
     stretch of country there is no sign of life, nor of anything
     appertaining to life. There is no bird in the steel-blue heaven, no
     movement upon the dull, grey earth--above all, there is absolute
     silence. Listen as one may, there is no shadow of a sound in all that
     mighty wilderness; nothing but silence--complete and heart-subduing
     silence.

     It has been said there is nothing appertaining to life upon the broad
     plain. That is hardly true. Looking down from the Sierra Blanco, one
     sees a pathway traced out across the desert, which winds away and is
     lost in the extreme distance. It is rutted with wheels and trodden
     down by the feet of many adventurers. Here and there there are
     scattered white objects which glisten in the sun, and stand out
     against the dull deposit of alkali. Approach, and examine them! They
     are bones: some large and coarse, others smaller and more delicate.
     The former have belonged to oxen, and the latter to men. For fifteen
     hundred miles one may trace this ghastly caravan route by these
     scattered remains of those who had fallen by the wayside.

     Looking down on this very scene, there stood upon the fourth of May,
     eighteen hundred and forty-seven, a solitary traveller. His
     appearance was such that he might have been the very genius or demon
     of the region. An observer would have found it difficult to say
     whether he was nearer to forty or to sixty. His face was lean and
     haggard, and the brown parchment-like skin was drawn tightly over the
     projecting bones; his long, brown hair and beard were all flecked and
     dashed with white; his eyes were sunken in his head, and burned with
     an unnatural lustre; while the hand which grasped his rifle was
     hardly more fleshy than that of a skeleton. As he stood, he leaned
     upon his weapon for support, and yet his tall figure and the massive
     framework of his bones suggested a wiry and vigorous constitution.
     His gaunt face, however, and his clothes, which hung so baggily over
     his shrivelled limbs, proclaimed what it was that gave him that
     senile and decrepit appearance. The man was dying--dying from hunger
     and from thirst.

     He had toiled painfully down the ravine, and on to this little
     elevation, in the vain hope of seeing some signs of water. Now the
     great salt plain stretched before his eyes, and the distant belt of
     savage mountains, without a sign anywhere of plant or tree, which
     might indicate the presence of moisture. In all that broad landscape
     there was no gleam of hope. North, and east, and west he looked with
     wild questioning eyes, and then he realised that his wanderings had
     come to an end, and that there, on that barren crag, he was about to
     die. "Why not here, as well as in a feather bed, twenty years hence,"
     he muttered, as he seated himself in the shelter of a boulder.

     Before sitting down, he had deposited upon the ground his useless
     rifle, and also a large bundle tied up in a grey shawl, which he had
     carried slung over his right shoulder. It appeared to be somewhat too
     heavy for his strength, for in lowering it, it came down on the
     ground with some little violence. Instantly there broke from the grey
     parcel a little moaning cry, and from it there protruded a small,
     scared face, with very bright brown eyes, and two little speckled,
     dimpled fists.

     "You've hurt me!" said a childish voice reproachfully.

     "Have I though," the man answered penitently, "I didn't go for to do
     it." As he spoke he unwrapped the grey shawl and extricated a pretty
     little girl of about five years of age, whose dainty shoes and smart
     pink frock with its little linen apron all bespoke a mother's care.
     The child was pale and wan, but her healthy arms and legs showed that
     she had suffered less than her companion.

     "How is it now?" he answered anxiously, for she was still rubbing the
     towsy golden curls which covered the back of her head.

     "Kiss it and make it well," she said, with perfect gravity, shoving
     the injured part up to him. "That's what mother used to do. Where's
     mother?"

     "Mother's gone. I guess you'll see her before long."

     "Gone, eh!" said the little girl. "Funny, she didn't say good-bye;
     she 'most always did if she was just goin' over to Auntie's for tea,
     and now she's been away three days. Say, it's awful dry, ain't it?
     Ain't there no water, nor nothing to eat?"

     "No, there ain't nothing, dearie. You'll just need to be patient
     awhile, and then you'll be all right. Put your head up agin me like
     that, and then you'll feel bullier. It ain't easy to talk when your
     lips is like leather, but I guess I'd best let you know how the cards
     lie. What's that you've got?"

     "Pretty things! fine things!" cried the little girl enthusiastically,
     holding up two glittering fragments of mica. "When we goes back to
     home I'll give them to brother Bob."

     "You'll see prettier things than them soon," said the man
     confidently. "You just wait a bit. I was going to tell you
     though--you remember when we left the river?"

     "Oh, yes."

     "Well, we reckoned we'd strike another river soon, d'ye see. But
     there was somethin' wrong; compasses, or map, or somethin', and it
     didn't turn up. Water ran out. Just except a little drop for the
     likes of you and--and--"

     "And you couldn't wash yourself," interrupted his companion gravely,
     staring up at his grimy visage.

     "No, nor drink. And Mr. Bender, he was the fust to go, and then
     Indian Pete, and then Mrs. McGregor, and then Johnny Hones, and then,
     dearie, your mother."

     "Then mother's a deader too," cried the little girl dropping her face
     in her pinafore and sobbing bitterly.

     "Yes, they all went except you and me. Then I thought there was some
     chance of water in this direction, so I heaved you over my shoulder
     and we tramped it together. It don't seem as though we've improved
     matters. There's an almighty small chance for us now!"

     "Do you mean that we are going to die too?" asked the child, checking
     her sobs, and raising her tear-stained face.

     "I guess that's about the size of it."

     "Why didn't you say so before?" she said, laughing gleefully. "You
     gave me such a fright. Why, of course, now as long as we die we'll be
     with mother again."

     "Yes, you will, dearie."

     "And you too. I'll tell her how awful good you've been. I'll bet she
     meets us at the door of Heaven with a big pitcher of water, and a lot
     of buckwheat cakes, hot, and toasted on both sides, like Bob and me
     was fond of. How long will it be first?"

     "I don't know--not very long." The man's eyes were fixed upon the
     northern horizon. In the blue vault of the heaven there had appeared
     three little specks which increased in size every moment, so rapidly
     did they approach. They speedily resolved themselves into three large
     brown birds, which circled over the heads of the two wanderers, and
     then settled upon some rocks which overlooked them. They were
     buzzards, the vultures of the west, whose coming is the forerunner of
     death.

     "Cocks and hens," cried the little girl gleefully, pointing at their
     ill-omened forms, and clapping her hands to make them rise. "Say, did
     God make this country?"

     "Of course He did," said her companion, rather startled by this
     unexpected question.

     "He made the country down in Illinois, and He made the Missouri," the
     little girl continued. "I guess somebody else made the country in
     these parts. It's not nearly so well done. They forgot the water and
     the trees."

     "What would ye think of offering up prayer?" the man asked
     diffidently.

     "It ain't night yet," she answered.

     "It don't matter. It ain't quite regular, but He won't mind that, you
     bet. You say over them ones that you used to say every night in the
     waggon when we was on the Plains."

     "Why don't you say some yourself?" the child asked, with wondering
     eyes.

     "I disremember them," he answered. "I hain't said none since I was
     half the height o' that gun. I guess it's never too late. You say
     them out, and I'll stand by and come in on the choruses."

     "Then you'll need to kneel down, and me too," she said, laying the
     shawl out for that purpose. "You've got to put your hands up like
     this. It makes you feel kind o' good."

     It was a strange sight had there been anything but the buzzards to
     see it. Side by side on the narrow shawl knelt the two wanderers, the
     little prattling child and the reckless, hardened adventurer. Her
     chubby face, and his haggard, angular visage were both turned up to
     the cloudless heaven in heartfelt entreaty to that dread being with
     whom they were face to face, while the two voices--the one thin and
     clear, the other deep and harsh--united in the entreaty for mercy and
     forgiveness. The prayer finished, they resumed their seat in the
     shadow of the boulder until the child fell asleep, nestling upon the
     broad breast of her protector. He watched over her slumber for some
     time, but Nature proved to be too strong for him. For three days and
     three nights he had allowed himself neither rest nor repose. Slowly
     the eyelids drooped over the tired eyes, and the head sunk lower and
     lower upon the breast, until the man's grizzled beard was mixed with
     the gold tresses of his companion, and both slept the same deep and
     dreamless slumber.

     Had the wanderer remained awake for another half hour a strange sight
     would have met his eyes. Far away on the extreme verge of the alkali
     plain there rose up a little spray of dust, very slight at first, and
     hardly to be distinguished from the mists of the distance, but
     gradually growing higher and broader until it formed a solid,
     well-defined cloud. This cloud continued to increase in size until it
     became evident that it could only be raised by a great multitude of
     moving creatures. In more fertile spots the observer would have come
     to the conclusion that one of those great herds of bisons which graze
     upon the prairie land was approaching him. This was obviously
     impossible in these arid wilds. As the whirl of dust drew nearer to
     the solitary bluff upon which the two castaways were reposing, the
     canvas-covered tilts of waggons and the figures of armed horsemen
     began to show up through the haze, and the apparition revealed itself
     as being a great caravan upon its journey for the West. But what a
     caravan! When the head of it had reached the base of the mountains,
     the rear was not yet visible on the horizon. Right across the
     enormous plain stretched the straggling array, waggons and carts, men
     on horseback, and men on foot. Innumerable women who staggered along
     under burdens, and children who toddled beside the waggons or peeped
     out from under the white coverings. This was evidently no ordinary
     party of immigrants, but rather some nomad people who had been
     compelled from stress of circumstances to seek themselves a new
     country. There rose through the clear air a confused clattering and
     rumbling from this great mass of humanity, with the creaking of
     wheels and the neighing of horses. Loud as it was, it was not
     sufficient to rouse the two tired wayfarers above them.

     At the head of the column there rode a score or more of grave
     ironfaced men, clad in sombre homespun garments and armed with
     rifles. On reaching the base of the bluff they halted, and held a
     short council among themselves.

     "The wells are to the right, my brothers," said one, a hard-lipped,
     clean-shaven man with grizzly hair.

     "To the right of the Sierra Blanco--so we shall reach the Rio
     Grande," said another.

     "Fear not for water," cried a third. "He who could draw it from the
     rocks will not now abandon His own chosen people."

     "Amen! Amen!" responded the whole party.

     They were about to resume their journey when one of the youngest and
     keenest-eyed uttered an exclamation and pointed up at the rugged crag
     above them. From its summit there fluttered a little wisp of pink,
     showing up hard and bright against the grey rocks behind. At the
     sight there was a general reining up of horses and unslinging of
     guns, while fresh horsemen came galloping up to reinforce the
     vanguard. The word "Redskins" was on every lip.

     "There can't be any number of Injuns here," said the elderly man who
     appeared to be in command. "We have passed the Pawnees, and there are
     no other tribes until we cross the great mountains."

     "Shall I go forward and see, Brother Stangerson," asked one of the
     band.

     "And I," "and I," cried a dozen voices.

     "Leave your horses below and we will await you here," the Elder
     answered. In a moment the young fellows had dismounted, fastened
     their horses, and were ascending the precipitous slope which led up
     to the object which had excited their curiosity. They advanced
     rapidly and noiselessly, with the confidence and dexterity of
     practised scouts. The watchers from the plain below could see them
     flit from rock to rock until their figures stood out against the
     skyline. The young man who had first given the alarm was leading
     them. Suddenly his followers saw him throw up his hands, as though
     overcome with astonishment, and on joining him they were affected in
     the same way by the sight which met their eyes.

     On the little plateau which crowned the barren hill there stood a
     single giant boulder, and against this boulder there lay a tall man,
     long-bearded and hard-featured, but of an excessive thinness. His
     placid face and regular breathing showed that he was fast asleep.
     Beside him lay a little child, with her round white arms encircling
     his brown sinewy neck, and her golden haired head resting upon the
     breast of his velveteen tunic. Her rosy lips were parted, showing the
     regular line of snow-white teeth within, and a playful smile played
     over her infantile features. Her plump little white legs terminating
     in white socks and neat shoes with shining buckles, offered a strange
     contrast to the long shrivelled members of her companion. On the
     ledge of rock above this strange couple there stood three solemn
     buzzards, who, at the sight of the new comers uttered raucous screams
     of disappointment and flapped sullenly away.

     The cries of the foul birds awoke the two sleepers who stared about
     them in bewilderment. The man staggered to his feet and looked down
     upon the plain which had been so desolate when sleep had overtaken
     him, and which was now traversed by this enormous body of men and of
     beasts. His face assumed an expression of incredulity as he gazed,
     and he passed his boney hand over his eyes. "This is what they call
     delirium, I guess," he muttered. The child stood beside him, holding
     on to the skirt of his coat, and said nothing but looked all round
     her with the wondering questioning gaze of childhood.

     The rescuing party were speedily able to convince the two castaways
     that their appearance was no delusion. One of them seized the little
     girl, and hoisted her upon his shoulder, while two others supported
     her gaunt companion, and assisted him towards the waggons.

     "My name is John Ferrier," the wanderer explained; "me and that
     little un are all that's left o' twenty-one people. The rest is all
     dead o' thirst and hunger away down in the south."

     "Is she your child?" asked someone.

     "I guess she is now," the other cried, defiantly; "she's mine 'cause
     I saved her. No man will take her from me. She's Lucy Ferrier from
     this day on. Who are you, though?" he continued, glancing with
     curiosity at his stalwart, sunburned rescuers; "there seems to be a
     powerful lot of ye."

     "Nigh upon ten thousand," said one of the young men; "we are the
     persecuted children of God--the chosen of the Angel Merona."

     "I never heard tell on him," said the wanderer. "He appears to have
     chosen a fair crowd of ye."

     "Do not jest at that which is sacred," said the other sternly. "We
     are of those who believe in those sacred writings, drawn in Egyptian
     letters on plates of beaten gold, which were handed unto the holy
     Joseph Smith at Palmyra. We have come from Nauvoo, in the State of
     Illinois, where we had founded our temple. We have come to seek a
     refuge from the violent man and from the godless, even though it be
     the heart of the desert."

     The name of Nauvoo evidently recalled recollections to John Ferrier.
     "I see," he said, "you are the Mormons."

     "We are the Mormons," answered his companions with one voice.

     "And where are you going?"

     "We do not know. The hand of God is leading us under the person of
     our Prophet. You must come before him. He shall say what is to be
     done with you."

     They had reached the base of the hill by this time, and were
     surrounded by crowds of the pilgrims--pale-faced meek-looking women,
     strong laughing children, and anxious earnest-eyed men. Many were the
     cries of astonishment and of commiseration which arose from them when
     they perceived the youth of one of the strangers and the destitution
     of the other. Their escort did not halt, however, but pushed on,
     followed by a great crowd of Mormons, until they reached a waggon,
     which was conspicuous for its great size and for the gaudiness and
     smartness of its appearance. Six horses were yoked to it, whereas the
     others were furnished with two, or, at most, four a-piece. Beside the
     driver there sat a man who could not have been more than thirty years
     of age, but whose massive head and resolute expression marked him as
     a leader. He was reading a brown-backed volume, but as the crowd
     approached he laid it aside, and listened attentively to an account
     of the episode. Then he turned to the two castaways.

     "If we take you with us," he said, in solemn words, "it can only be
     as believers in our own creed. We shall have no wolves in our fold.
     Better far that your bones should bleach in this wilderness than that
     you should prove to be that little speck of decay which in time
     corrupts the whole fruit. Will you come with us on these terms?"

     "Guess I'll come with you on any terms," said Ferrier, with such
     emphasis that the grave Elders could not restrain a smile. The leader
     alone retained his stern, impressive expression.

     "Take him, Brother Stangerson," he said, "give him food and drink,
     and the child likewise. Let it be your task also to teach him our
     holy creed. We have delayed long enough. Forward! On, on to Zion!"

     "On, on to Zion!" cried the crowd of Mormons, and the words rippled
     down the long caravan, passing from mouth to mouth until they died
     away in a dull murmur in the far distance. With a cracking of whips
     and a creaking of wheels the great waggons got into motion, and soon
     the whole caravan was winding along once more. The Elder to whose
     care the two waifs had been committed, led them to his waggon, where
     a meal was already awaiting them.

     "You shall remain here," he said. "In a few days you will have
     recovered from your fatigues. In the meantime, remember that now and
     forever you are of our religion. Brigham Young has said it, and he
     has spoken with the voice of Joseph Smith, which is the voice of
     God."





          CHAPTER II
          The Flower Of Utah


     This is not the place to commemorate the trials and privations
     endured by the immigrant Mormons before they came to their final
     haven. From the shores of the Mississippi to the western slopes of
     the Rocky Mountains they had struggled on with a constancy almost
     unparalleled in history. The savage man, and the savage beast,
     hunger, thirst, fatigue, and disease--every impediment which Nature
     could place in the way--had all been overcome with Anglo-Saxon
     tenacity. Yet the long journey and the accumulated terrors had shaken
     the hearts of the stoutest among them. There was not one who did not
     sink upon his knees in heartfelt prayer when they saw the broad
     valley of Utah bathed in the sunlight beneath them, and learned from
     the lips of their leader that this was the promised land, and that
     these virgin acres were to be theirs for evermore.

     Young speedily proved himself to be a skilful administrator as well
     as a resolute chief. Maps were drawn and charts prepared, in which
     the future city was sketched out. All around farms were apportioned
     and allotted in proportion to the standing of each individual. The
     tradesman was put to his trade and the artisan to his calling. In the
     town streets and squares sprang up, as if by magic. In the country
     there was draining and hedging, planting and clearing, until the next
     summer saw the whole country golden with the wheat crop. Everything
     prospered in the strange settlement. Above all, the great temple
     which they had erected in the centre of the city grew ever taller and
     larger. From the first blush of dawn until the closing of the
     twilight, the clatter of the hammer and the rasp of the saw was never
     absent from the monument which the immigrants erected to Him who had
     led them safe through many dangers.

     The two castaways, John Ferrier and the little girl who had shared
     his fortunes and had been adopted as his daughter, accompanied the
     Mormons to the end of their great pilgrimage. Little Lucy Ferrier was
     borne along pleasantly enough in Elder Stangerson's waggon, a retreat
     which she shared with the Mormon's three wives and with his son, a
     headstrong forward boy of twelve. Having rallied, with the elasticity
     of childhood, from the shock caused by her mother's death, she soon
     became a pet with the women, and reconciled herself to this new life
     in her moving canvas-covered home. In the meantime Ferrier having
     recovered from his privations, distinguished himself as a useful
     guide and an indefatigable hunter. So rapidly did he gain the esteem
     of his new companions, that when they reached the end of their
     wanderings, it was unanimously agreed that he should be provided with
     as large and as fertile a tract of land as any of the settlers, with
     the exception of Young himself, and of Stangerson, Kemball, Johnston,
     and Drebber, who were the four principal Elders.

     On the farm thus acquired John Ferrier built himself a substantial
     log-house, which received so many additions in succeeding years that
     it grew into a roomy villa. He was a man of a practical turn of mind,
     keen in his dealings and skilful with his hands. His iron
     constitution enabled him to work morning and evening at improving and
     tilling his lands. Hence it came about that his farm and all that
     belonged to him prospered exceedingly. In three years he was better
     off than his neighbours, in six he was well-to-do, in nine he was
     rich, and in twelve there were not half a dozen men in the whole of
     Salt Lake City who could compare with him. From the great inland sea
     to the distant Wahsatch Mountains there was no name better known than
     that of John Ferrier.

     There was one way and only one in which he offended the
     susceptibilities of his co-religionists. No argument or persuasion
     could ever induce him to set up a female establishment after the
     manner of his companions. He never gave reasons for this persistent
     refusal, but contented himself by resolutely and inflexibly adhering
     to his determination. There were some who accused him of lukewarmness
     in his adopted religion, and others who put it down to greed of
     wealth and reluctance to incur expense. Others, again, spoke of some
     early love affair, and of a fair-haired girl who had pined away on
     the shores of the Atlantic. Whatever the reason, Ferrier remained
     strictly celibate. In every other respect he conformed to the
     religion of the young settlement, and gained the name of being an
     orthodox and straight-walking man.

     Lucy Ferrier grew up within the log-house, and assisted her adopted
     father in all his undertakings. The keen air of the mountains and the
     balsamic odour of the pine trees took the place of nurse and mother
     to the young girl. As year succeeded to year she grew taller and
     stronger, her cheek more rudy, and her step more elastic. Many a
     wayfarer upon the high road which ran by Ferrier's farm felt
     long-forgotten thoughts revive in their mind as they watched her
     lithe girlish figure tripping through the wheatfields, or met her
     mounted upon her father's mustang, and managing it with all the ease
     and grace of a true child of the West. So the bud blossomed into a
     flower, and the year which saw her father the richest of the farmers
     left her as fair a specimen of American girlhood as could be found in
     the whole Pacific slope.

     It was not the father, however, who first discovered that the child
     had developed into the woman. It seldom is in such cases. That
     mysterious change is too subtle and too gradual to be measured by
     dates. Least of all does the maiden herself know it until the tone of
     a voice or the touch of a hand sets her heart thrilling within her,
     and she learns, with a mixture of pride and of fear, that a new and a
     larger nature has awoken within her. There are few who cannot recall
     that day and remember the one little incident which heralded the dawn
     of a new life. In the case of Lucy Ferrier the occasion was serious
     enough in itself, apart from its future influence on her destiny and
     that of many besides.

     It was a warm June morning, and the Latter Day Saints were as busy as
     the bees whose hive they have chosen for their emblem. In the fields
     and in the streets rose the same hum of human industry. Down the
     dusty high roads defiled long streams of heavily-laden mules, all
     heading to the west, for the gold fever had broken out in California,
     and the Overland Route lay through the City of the Elect. There, too,
     were droves of sheep and bullocks coming in from the outlying pasture
     lands, and trains of tired immigrants, men and horses equally weary
     of their interminable journey. Through all this motley assemblage,
     threading her way with the skill of an accomplished rider, there
     galloped Lucy Ferrier, her fair face flushed with the exercise and
     her long chestnut hair floating out behind her. She had a commission
     from her father in the City, and was dashing in as she had done many
     a time before, with all the fearlessness of youth, thinking only of
     her task and how it was to be performed. The travel-stained
     adventurers gazed after her in astonishment, and even the unemotional
     Indians, journeying in with their pelties, relaxed their accustomed
     stoicism as they marvelled at the beauty of the pale-faced maiden.

     She had reached the outskirts of the city when she found the road
     blocked by a great drove of cattle, driven by a half-dozen
     wild-looking herdsmen from the plains. In her impatience she
     endeavoured to pass this obstacle by pushing her horse into what
     appeared to be a gap. Scarcely had she got fairly into it, however,
     before the beasts closed in behind her, and she found herself
     completely imbedded in the moving stream of fierce-eyed, long-horned
     bullocks. Accustomed as she was to deal with cattle, she was not
     alarmed at her situation, but took advantage of every opportunity to
     urge her horse on in the hopes of pushing her way through the
     cavalcade. Unfortunately the horns of one of the creatures, either by
     accident or design, came in violent contact with the flank of the
     mustang, and excited it to madness. In an instant it reared up upon
     its hind legs with a snort of rage, and pranced and tossed in a way
     that would have unseated any but a most skilful rider. The situation
     was full of peril. Every plunge of the excited horse brought it
     against the horns again, and goaded it to fresh madness. It was all
     that the girl could do to keep herself in the saddle, yet a slip
     would mean a terrible death under the hoofs of the unwieldy and
     terrified animals. Unaccustomed to sudden emergencies, her head began
     to swim, and her grip upon the bridle to relax. Choked by the rising
     cloud of dust and by the steam from the struggling creatures, she
     might have abandoned her efforts in despair, but for a kindly voice
     at her elbow which assured her of assistance. At the same moment a
     sinewy brown hand caught the frightened horse by the curb, and
     forcing a way through the drove, soon brought her to the outskirts.

     "You're not hurt, I hope, miss," said her preserver, respectfully.

     She looked up at his dark, fierce face, and laughed saucily. "I'm
     awful frightened," she said, naively; "whoever would have thought
     that Poncho would have been so scared by a lot of cows?"

     "Thank God you kept your seat," the other said earnestly. He was a
     tall, savage-looking young fellow, mounted on a powerful roan horse,
     and clad in the rough dress of a hunter, with a long rifle slung over
     his shoulders. "I guess you are the daughter of John Ferrier," he
     remarked, "I saw you ride down from his house. When you see him, ask
     him if he remembers the Jefferson Hopes of St. Louis. If he's the
     same Ferrier, my father and he were pretty thick."

     "Hadn't you better come and ask yourself?" she asked, demurely.

     The young fellow seemed pleased at the suggestion, and his dark eyes
     sparkled with pleasure. "I'll do so," he said, "we've been in the
     mountains for two months, and are not over and above in visiting
     condition. He must take us as he finds us."

     "He has a good deal to thank you for, and so have I," she answered,
     "he's awful fond of me. If those cows had jumped on me he'd have
     never got over it."

     "Neither would I," said her companion.

     "You! Well, I don't see that it would make much matter to you,
     anyhow. You ain't even a friend of ours."

     The young hunter's dark face grew so gloomy over this remark that
     Lucy Ferrier laughed aloud.

     "There, I didn't mean that," she said; "of course, you are a friend
     now. You must come and see us. Now I must push along, or father won't
     trust me with his business any more. Good-bye!"

     "Good-bye," he answered, raising his broad sombrero, and bending over
     her little hand. She wheeled her mustang round, gave it a cut with
     her riding-whip, and darted away down the broad road in a rolling
     cloud of dust.

     Young Jefferson Hope rode on with his companions, gloomy and
     taciturn. He and they had been among the Nevada Mountains prospecting
     for silver, and were returning to Salt Lake City in the hope of
     raising capital enough to work some lodes which they had discovered.
     He had been as keen as any of them upon the business until this
     sudden incident had drawn his thoughts into another channel. The
     sight of the fair young girl, as frank and wholesome as the Sierra
     breezes, had stirred his volcanic, untamed heart to its very depths.
     When she had vanished from his sight, he realized that a crisis had
     come in his life, and that neither silver speculations nor any other
     questions could ever be of such importance to him as this new and
     all-absorbing one. The love which had sprung up in his heart was not
     the sudden, changeable fancy of a boy, but rather the wild, fierce
     passion of a man of strong will and imperious temper. He had been
     accustomed to succeed in all that he undertook. He swore in his heart
     that he would not fail in this if human effort and human perseverance
     could render him successful.

     He called on John Ferrier that night, and many times again, until his
     face was a familiar one at the farm-house. John, cooped up in the
     valley, and absorbed in his work, had had little chance of learning
     the news of the outside world during the last twelve years. All this
     Jefferson Hope was able to tell him, and in a style which interested
     Lucy as well as her father. He had been a pioneer in California, and
     could narrate many a strange tale of fortunes made and fortunes lost
     in those wild, halcyon days. He had been a scout too, and a trapper,
     a silver explorer, and a ranchman. Wherever stirring adventures were
     to be had, Jefferson Hope had been there in search of them. He soon
     became a favourite with the old farmer, who spoke eloquently of his
     virtues. On such occasions, Lucy was silent, but her blushing cheek
     and her bright, happy eyes, showed only too clearly that her young
     heart was no longer her own. Her honest father may not have observed
     these symptoms, but they were assuredly not thrown away upon the man
     who had won her affections.

     It was a summer evening when he came galloping down the road and
     pulled up at the gate. She was at the doorway, and came down to meet
     him. He threw the bridle over the fence and strode up the pathway.

     "I am off, Lucy," he said, taking her two hands in his, and gazing
     tenderly down into her face; "I won't ask you to come with me now,
     but will you be ready to come when I am here again?"

     "And when will that be?" she asked, blushing and laughing.

     "A couple of months at the outside. I will come and claim you then,
     my darling. There's no one who can stand between us."

     "And how about father?" she asked.

     "He has given his consent, provided we get these mines working all
     right. I have no fear on that head."

     "Oh, well; of course, if you and father have arranged it all, there's
     no more to be said," she whispered, with her cheek against his broad
     breast.

     "Thank God!" he said, hoarsely, stooping and kissing her. "It is
     settled, then. The longer I stay, the harder it will be to go. They
     are waiting for me at the caon. Good-bye, my own darling--good-bye.
     In two months you shall see me."

     He tore himself from her as he spoke, and, flinging himself upon his
     horse, galloped furiously away, never even looking round, as though
     afraid that his resolution might fail him if he took one glance at
     what he was leaving. She stood at the gate, gazing after him until he
     vanished from her sight. Then she walked back into the house, the
     happiest girl in all Utah.





          CHAPTER III
          John Ferrier Talks With The Prophet


     Three weeks had passed since Jefferson Hope and his comrades had
     departed from Salt Lake City. John Ferrier's heart was sore within
     him when he thought of the young man's return, and of the impending
     loss of his adopted child. Yet her bright and happy face reconciled
     him to the arrangement more than any argument could have done. He had
     always determined, deep down in his resolute heart, that nothing
     would ever induce him to allow his daughter to wed a Mormon. Such a
     marriage he regarded as no marriage at all, but as a shame and a
     disgrace. Whatever he might think of the Mormon doctrines, upon that
     one point he was inflexible. He had to seal his mouth on the subject,
     however, for to express an unorthodox opinion was a dangerous matter
     in those days in the Land of the Saints.

     Yes, a dangerous matter--so dangerous that even the most saintly
     dared only whisper their religious opinions with bated breath, lest
     something which fell from their lips might be misconstrued, and bring
     down a swift retribution upon them. The victims of persecution had
     now turned persecutors on their own account, and persecutors of the
     most terrible description. Not the Inquisition of Seville, nor the
     German Vehmgericht, nor the Secret Societies of Italy, were ever able
     to put a more formidable machinery in motion than that which cast a
     cloud over the State of Utah.

     Its invisibility, and the mystery which was attached to it, made this
     organization doubly terrible. It appeared to be omniscient and
     omnipotent, and yet was neither seen nor heard. The man who held out
     against the Church vanished away, and none knew whither he had gone
     or what had befallen him. His wife and his children awaited him at
     home, but no father ever returned to tell them how he had fared at
     the hands of his secret judges. A rash word or a hasty act was
     followed by annihilation, and yet none knew what the nature might be
     of this terrible power which was suspended over them. No wonder that
     men went about in fear and trembling, and that even in the heart of
     the wilderness they dared not whisper the doubts which oppressed
     them.

     At first this vague and terrible power was exercised only upon the
     recalcitrants who, having embraced the Mormon faith, wished
     afterwards to pervert or to abandon it. Soon, however, it took a
     wider range. The supply of adult women was running short, and
     polygamy without a female population on which to draw was a barren
     doctrine indeed. Strange rumours began to be bandied about--rumours
     of murdered immigrants and rifled camps in regions where Indians had
     never been seen. Fresh women appeared in the harems of the
     Elders--women who pined and wept, and bore upon their faces the
     traces of an unextinguishable horror. Belated wanderers upon the
     mountains spoke of gangs of armed men, masked, stealthy, and
     noiseless, who flitted by them in the darkness. These tales and
     rumours took substance and shape, and were corroborated and
     re-corroborated, until they resolved themselves into a definite name.
     To this day, in the lonely ranches of the West, the name of the
     Danite Band, or the Avenging Angels, is a sinister and an ill-omened
     one.

     Fuller knowledge of the organization which produced such terrible
     results served to increase rather than to lessen the horror which it
     inspired in the minds of men. None knew who belonged to this ruthless
     society. The names of the participators in the deeds of blood and
     violence done under the name of religion were kept profoundly secret.
     The very friend to whom you communicated your misgivings as to the
     Prophet and his mission, might be one of those who would come forth
     at night with fire and sword to exact a terrible reparation. Hence
     every man feared his neighbour, and none spoke of the things which
     were nearest his heart.

     One fine morning, John Ferrier was about to set out to his
     wheatfields, when he heard the click of the latch, and, looking
     through the window, saw a stout, sandy-haired, middle-aged man coming
     up the pathway. His heart leapt to his mouth, for this was none other
     than the great Brigham Young himself. Full of trepidation--for he
     knew that such a visit boded him little good--Ferrier ran to the door
     to greet the Mormon chief. The latter, however, received his
     salutations coldly, and followed him with a stern face into the
     sitting-room.

     "Brother Ferrier," he said, taking a seat, and eyeing the farmer
     keenly from under his light-coloured eyelashes, "the true believers
     have been good friends to you. We picked you up when you were
     starving in the desert, we shared our food with you, led you safe to
     the Chosen Valley, gave you a goodly share of land, and allowed you
     to wax rich under our protection. Is not this so?"

     "It is so," answered John Ferrier.

     "In return for all this we asked but one condition: that was, that
     you should embrace the true faith, and conform in every way to its
     usages. This you promised to do, and this, if common report says
     truly, you have neglected."

     "And how have I neglected it?" asked Ferrier, throwing out his hands
     in expostulation. "Have I not given to the common fund? Have I not
     attended at the Temple? Have I not--?"

     "Where are your wives?" asked Young, looking round him. "Call them
     in, that I may greet them."

     "It is true that I have not married," Ferrier answered. "But women
     were few, and there were many who had better claims than I. I was not
     a lonely man: I had my daughter to attend to my wants."

     "It is of that daughter that I would speak to you," said the leader
     of the Mormons. "She has grown to be the flower of Utah, and has
     found favour in the eyes of many who are high in the land."

     John Ferrier groaned internally.

     "There are stories of her which I would fain disbelieve--stories that
     she is sealed to some Gentile. This must be the gossip of idle
     tongues. What is the thirteenth rule in the code of the sainted
     Joseph Smith? 'Let every maiden of the true faith marry one of the
     elect; for if she wed a Gentile, she commits a grievous sin.' This
     being so, it is impossible that you, who profess the holy creed,
     should suffer your daughter to violate it."

     John Ferrier made no answer, but he played nervously with his
     riding-whip.

     "Upon this one point your whole faith shall be tested--so it has been
     decided in the Sacred Council of Four. The girl is young, and we
     would not have her wed grey hairs, neither would we deprive her of
     all choice. We Elders have many heifers, but our children must also
     be provided. Stangerson has a son, and Drebber has a son, and either
     of them would gladly welcome your daughter to their house. Let her
     choose between them. They are young and rich, and of the true faith.
     What say you to that?"

     Ferrier remained silent for some little time with his brows knitted.

     "You will give us time," he said at last. "My daughter is very
     young--she is scarce of an age to marry."

     "She shall have a month to choose," said Young, rising from his seat.
     "At the end of that time she shall give her answer."

     He was passing through the door, when he turned, with flushed face
     and flashing eyes. "It were better for you, John Ferrier," he
     thundered, "that you and she were now lying blanched skeletons upon
     the Sierra Blanco, than that you should put your weak wills against
     the orders of the Holy Four!"

     With a threatening gesture of his hand, he turned from the door, and
     Ferrier heard his heavy step scrunching along the shingly path.

     He was still sitting with his elbows upon his knees, considering how
     he should broach the matter to his daughter when a soft hand was laid
     upon his, and looking up, he saw her standing beside him. One glance
     at her pale, frightened face showed him that she had heard what had
     passed.

     "I could not help it," she said, in answer to his look. "His voice
     rang through the house. Oh, father, father, what shall we do?"

     "Don't you scare yourself," he answered, drawing her to him, and
     passing his broad, rough hand caressingly over her chestnut hair.
     "We'll fix it up somehow or another. You don't find your fancy kind
     o' lessening for this chap, do you?"

     A sob and a squeeze of his hand was her only answer.

     "No; of course not. I shouldn't care to hear you say you did. He's a
     likely lad, and he's a Christian, which is more than these folk here,
     in spite o' all their praying and preaching. There's a party starting
     for Nevada to-morrow, and I'll manage to send him a message letting
     him know the hole we are in. If I know anything o' that young man,
     he'll be back here with a speed that would whip electro-telegraphs."

     Lucy laughed through her tears at her father's description.

     "When he comes, he will advise us for the best. But it is for you
     that I am frightened, dear. One hears--one hears such dreadful
     stories about those who oppose the Prophet: something terrible always
     happens to them."

     "But we haven't opposed him yet," her father answered. "It will be
     time to look out for squalls when we do. We have a clear month before
     us; at the end of that, I guess we had best shin out of Utah."

     "Leave Utah!"

     "That's about the size of it."

     "But the farm?"

     "We will raise as much as we can in money, and let the rest go. To
     tell the truth, Lucy, it isn't the first time I have thought of doing
     it. I don't care about knuckling under to any man, as these folk do
     to their darned prophet. I'm a free-born American, and it's all new
     to me. Guess I'm too old to learn. If he comes browsing about this
     farm, he might chance to run up against a charge of buckshot
     travelling in the opposite direction."

     "But they won't let us leave," his daughter objected.

     "Wait till Jefferson comes, and we'll soon manage that. In the
     meantime, don't you fret yourself, my dearie, and don't get your eyes
     swelled up, else he'll be walking into me when he sees you. There's
     nothing to be afeared about, and there's no danger at all."

     John Ferrier uttered these consoling remarks in a very confident
     tone, but she could not help observing that he paid unusual care to
     the fastening of the doors that night, and that he carefully cleaned
     and loaded the rusty old shotgun which hung upon the wall of his
     bedroom.

          CHAPTER IV
          A Flight For Life


     On the morning which followed his interview with the Mormon Prophet,
     John Ferrier went in to Salt Lake City, and having found his
     acquaintance, who was bound for the Nevada Mountains, he entrusted
     him with his message to Jefferson Hope. In it he told the young man
     of the imminent danger which threatened them, and how necessary it
     was that he should return. Having done thus he felt easier in his
     mind, and returned home with a lighter heart.

     As he approached his farm, he was surprised to see a horse hitched to
     each of the posts of the gate. Still more surprised was he on
     entering to find two young men in possession of his sitting-room.
     One, with a long pale face, was leaning back in the rocking-chair,
     with his feet cocked up upon the stove. The other, a bull-necked
     youth with coarse bloated features, was standing in front of the
     window with his hands in his pocket, whistling a popular hymn. Both
     of them nodded to Ferrier as he entered, and the one in the
     rocking-chair commenced the conversation.

     "Maybe you don't know us," he said. "This here is the son of Elder
     Drebber, and I'm Joseph Stangerson, who travelled with you in the
     desert when the Lord stretched out His hand and gathered you into the
     true fold."

     "As He will all the nations in His own good time," said the other in
     a nasal voice; "He grindeth slowly but exceeding small."

     John Ferrier bowed coldly. He had guessed who his visitors were.

     "We have come," continued Stangerson, "at the advice of our fathers
     to solicit the hand of your daughter for whichever of us may seem
     good to you and to her. As I have but four wives and Brother Drebber
     here has seven, it appears to me that my claim is the stronger one."

     "Nay, nay, Brother Stangerson," cried the other; "the question is not
     how many wives we have, but how many we can keep. My father has now
     given over his mills to me, and I am the richer man."

     "But my prospects are better," said the other, warmly. "When the Lord
     removes my father, I shall have his tanning yard and his leather
     factory. Then I am your elder, and am higher in the Church."

     "It will be for the maiden to decide," rejoined young Drebber,
     smirking at his own reflection in the glass. "We will leave it all to
     her decision."

     During this dialogue, John Ferrier had stood fuming in the doorway,
     hardly able to keep his riding-whip from the backs of his two
     visitors.

     "Look here," he said at last, striding up to them, "when my daughter
     summons you, you can come, but until then I don't want to see your
     faces again."

     The two young Mormons stared at him in amazement. In their eyes this
     competition between them for the maiden's hand was the highest of
     honours both to her and her father.

     "There are two ways out of the room," cried Ferrier; "there is the
     door, and there is the window. Which do you care to use?"

     His brown face looked so savage, and his gaunt hands so threatening,
     that his visitors sprang to their feet and beat a hurried retreat.
     The old farmer followed them to the door.

     "Let me know when you have settled which it is to be," he said,
     sardonically.

     "You shall smart for this!" Stangerson cried, white with rage. "You
     have defied the Prophet and the Council of Four. You shall rue it to
     the end of your days."

     "The hand of the Lord shall be heavy upon you," cried young Drebber;
     "He will arise and smite you!"

     "Then I'll start the smiting," exclaimed Ferrier furiously, and would
     have rushed upstairs for his gun had not Lucy seized him by the arm
     and restrained him. Before he could escape from her, the clatter of
     horses' hoofs told him that they were beyond his reach.

     "The young canting rascals!" he exclaimed, wiping the perspiration
     from his forehead; "I would sooner see you in your grave, my girl,
     than the wife of either of them."

     "And so should I, father," she answered, with spirit; "but Jefferson
     will soon be here."

     "Yes. It will not be long before he comes. The sooner the better, for
     we do not know what their next move may be."

     It was, indeed, high time that someone capable of giving advice and
     help should come to the aid of the sturdy old farmer and his adopted
     daughter. In the whole history of the settlement there had never been
     such a case of rank disobedience to the authority of the Elders. If
     minor errors were punished so sternly, what would be the fate of this
     arch rebel. Ferrier knew that his wealth and position would be of no
     avail to him. Others as well known and as rich as himself had been
     spirited away before now, and their goods given over to the Church.
     He was a brave man, but he trembled at the vague, shadowy terrors
     which hung over him. Any known danger he could face with a firm lip,
     but this suspense was unnerving. He concealed his fears from his
     daughter, however, and affected to make light of the whole matter,
     though she, with the keen eye of love, saw plainly that he was ill at
     ease.

     He expected that he would receive some message or remonstrance from
     Young as to his conduct, and he was not mistaken, though it came in
     an unlooked-for manner. Upon rising next morning he found, to his
     surprise, a small square of paper pinned on to the coverlet of his
     bed just over his chest. On it was printed, in bold straggling
     letters:--

     "Twenty-nine days are given you for amendment, and then--"

     The dash was more fear-inspiring than any threat could have been. How
     this warning came into his room puzzled John Ferrier sorely, for his
     servants slept in an outhouse, and the doors and windows had all been
     secured. He crumpled the paper up and said nothing to his daughter,
     but the incident struck a chill into his heart. The twenty-nine days
     were evidently the balance of the month which Young had promised.
     What strength or courage could avail against an enemy armed with such
     mysterious powers? The hand which fastened that pin might have struck
     him to the heart, and he could never have known who had slain him.

     Still more shaken was he next morning. They had sat down to their
     breakfast when Lucy with a cry of surprise pointed upwards. In the
     centre of the ceiling was scrawled, with a burned stick apparently,
     the number 28. To his daughter it was unintelligible, and he did not
     enlighten her. That night he sat up with his gun and kept watch and
     ward. He saw and he heard nothing, and yet in the morning a great 27
     had been painted upon the outside of his door.

     Thus day followed day; and as sure as morning came he found that his
     unseen enemies had kept their register, and had marked up in some
     conspicuous position how many days were still left to him out of the
     month of grace. Sometimes the fatal numbers appeared upon the walls,
     sometimes upon the floors, occasionally they were on small placards
     stuck upon the garden gate or the railings. With all his vigilance
     John Ferrier could not discover whence these daily warnings
     proceeded. A horror which was almost superstitious came upon him at
     the sight of them. He became haggard and restless, and his eyes had
     the troubled look of some hunted creature. He had but one hope in
     life now, and that was for the arrival of the young hunter from
     Nevada.

     Twenty had changed to fifteen and fifteen to ten, but there was no
     news of the absentee. One by one the numbers dwindled down, and still
     there came no sign of him. Whenever a horseman clattered down the
     road, or a driver shouted at his team, the old farmer hurried to the
     gate thinking that help had arrived at last. At last, when he saw
     five give way to four and that again to three, he lost heart, and
     abandoned all hope of escape. Single-handed, and with his limited
     knowledge of the mountains which surrounded the settlement, he knew
     that he was powerless. The more-frequented roads were strictly
     watched and guarded, and none could pass along them without an order
     from the Council. Turn which way he would, there appeared to be no
     avoiding the blow which hung over him. Yet the old man never wavered
     in his resolution to part with life itself before he consented to
     what he regarded as his daughter's dishonour.

     He was sitting alone one evening pondering deeply over his troubles,
     and searching vainly for some way out of them. That morning had shown
     the figure 2 upon the wall of his house, and the next day would be
     the last of the allotted time. What was to happen then? All manner of
     vague and terrible fancies filled his imagination. And his
     daughter--what was to become of her after he was gone? Was there no
     escape from the invisible network which was drawn all round them. He
     sank his head upon the table and sobbed at the thought of his own
     impotence.

     What was that? In the silence he heard a gentle scratching
     sound--low, but very distinct in the quiet of the night. It came from
     the door of the house. Ferrier crept into the hall and listened
     intently. There was a pause for a few moments, and then the low
     insidious sound was repeated. Someone was evidently tapping very
     gently upon one of the panels of the door. Was it some midnight
     assassin who had come to carry out the murderous orders of the secret
     tribunal? Or was it some agent who was marking up that the last day
     of grace had arrived. John Ferrier felt that instant death would be
     better than the suspense which shook his nerves and chilled his
     heart. Springing forward he drew the bolt and threw the door open.

     Outside all was calm and quiet. The night was fine, and the stars
     were twinkling brightly overhead. The little front garden lay before
     the farmer's eyes bounded by the fence and gate, but neither there
     nor on the road was any human being to be seen. With a sigh of
     relief, Ferrier looked to right and to left, until happening to
     glance straight down at his own feet he saw to his astonishment a man
     lying flat upon his face upon the ground, with arms and legs all
     asprawl.

     So unnerved was he at the sight that he leaned up against the wall
     with his hand to his throat to stifle his inclination to call out.
     His first thought was that the prostrate figure was that of some
     wounded or dying man, but as he watched it he saw it writhe along the
     ground and into the hall with the rapidity and noiselessness of a
     serpent. Once within the house the man sprang to his feet, closed the
     door, and revealed to the astonished farmer the fierce face and
     resolute expression of Jefferson Hope.

     "Good God!" gasped John Ferrier. "How you scared me! Whatever made
     you come in like that."

     "Give me food," the other said, hoarsely. "I have had no time for
     bite or sup for eight-and-forty hours." He flung himself upon the
     cold meat and bread which were still lying upon the table from his
     host's supper, and devoured it voraciously. "Does Lucy bear up well?"
     he asked, when he had satisfied his hunger.

     "Yes. She does not know the danger," her father answered.

     "That is well. The house is watched on every side. That is why I
     crawled my way up to it. They may be darned sharp, but they're not
     quite sharp enough to catch a Washoe hunter."

     John Ferrier felt a different man now that he realized that he had a
     devoted ally. He seized the young man's leathery hand and wrung it
     cordially. "You're a man to be proud of," he said. "There are not
     many who would come to share our danger and our troubles."

     "You've hit it there, pard," the young hunter answered. "I have a
     respect for you, but if you were alone in this business I'd think
     twice before I put my head into such a hornet's nest. It's Lucy that
     brings me here, and before harm comes on her I guess there will be
     one less o' the Hope family in Utah."

     "What are we to do?"

     "To-morrow is your last day, and unless you act to-night you are
     lost. I have a mule and two horses waiting in the Eagle Ravine. How
     much money have you?"

     "Two thousand dollars in gold, and five in notes."

     "That will do. I have as much more to add to it. We must push for
     Carson City through the mountains. You had best wake Lucy. It is as
     well that the servants do not sleep in the house."

     While Ferrier was absent, preparing his daughter for the approaching
     journey, Jefferson Hope packed all the eatables that he could find
     into a small parcel, and filled a stoneware jar with water, for he
     knew by experience that the mountain wells were few and far between.
     He had hardly completed his arrangements before the farmer returned
     with his daughter all dressed and ready for a start. The greeting
     between the lovers was warm, but brief, for minutes were precious,
     and there was much to be done.

     "We must make our start at once," said Jefferson Hope, speaking in a
     low but resolute voice, like one who realizes the greatness of the
     peril, but has steeled his heart to meet it. "The front and back
     entrances are watched, but with caution we may get away through the
     side window and across the fields. Once on the road we are only two
     miles from the Ravine where the horses are waiting. By daybreak we
     should be half-way through the mountains."

     "What if we are stopped," asked Ferrier.

     Hope slapped the revolver butt which protruded from the front of his
     tunic. "If they are too many for us we shall take two or three of
     them with us," he said with a sinister smile.

     The lights inside the house had all been extinguished, and from the
     darkened window Ferrier peered over the fields which had been his
     own, and which he was now about to abandon for ever. He had long
     nerved himself to the sacrifice, however, and the thought of the
     honour and happiness of his daughter outweighed any regret at his
     ruined fortunes. All looked so peaceful and happy, the rustling trees
     and the broad silent stretch of grain-land, that it was difficult to
     realize that the spirit of murder lurked through it all. Yet the
     white face and set expression of the young hunter showed that in his
     approach to the house he had seen enough to satisfy him upon that
     head.

     Ferrier carried the bag of gold and notes, Jefferson Hope had the
     scanty provisions and water, while Lucy had a small bundle containing
     a few of her more valued possessions. Opening the window very slowly
     and carefully, they waited until a dark cloud had somewhat obscured
     the night, and then one by one passed through into the little garden.
     With bated breath and crouching figures they stumbled across it, and
     gained the shelter of the hedge, which they skirted until they came
     to the gap which opened into the cornfields. They had just reached
     this point when the young man seized his two companions and dragged
     them down into the shadow, where they lay silent and trembling.

     It was as well that his prairie training had given Jefferson Hope the
     ears of a lynx. He and his friends had hardly crouched down before
     the melancholy hooting of a mountain owl was heard within a few yards
     of them, which was immediately answered by another hoot at a small
     distance. At the same moment a vague shadowy figure emerged from the
     gap for which they had been making, and uttered the plaintive signal
     cry again, on which a second man appeared out of the obscurity.

     "To-morrow at midnight," said the first who appeared to be in
     authority. "When the Whip-poor-Will calls three times."

     "It is well," returned the other. "Shall I tell Brother Drebber?"

     "Pass it on to him, and from him to the others. Nine to seven!"

     "Seven to five!" repeated the other, and the two figures flitted away
     in different directions. Their concluding words had evidently been
     some form of sign and countersign. The instant that their footsteps
     had died away in the distance, Jefferson Hope sprang to his feet, and
     helping his companions through the gap, led the way across the fields
     at the top of his speed, supporting and half-carrying the girl when
     her strength appeared to fail her.

     "Hurry on! hurry on!" he gasped from time to time. "We are through
     the line of sentinels. Everything depends on speed. Hurry on!"

     Once on the high road they made rapid progress. Only once did they
     meet anyone, and then they managed to slip into a field, and so avoid
     recognition. Before reaching the town the hunter branched away into a
     rugged and narrow footpath which led to the mountains. Two dark
     jagged peaks loomed above them through the darkness, and the defile
     which led between them was the Eagle Caon in which the horses were
     awaiting them. With unerring instinct Jefferson Hope picked his way
     among the great boulders and along the bed of a dried-up watercourse,
     until he came to the retired corner, screened with rocks, where the
     faithful animals had been picketed. The girl was placed upon the
     mule, and old Ferrier upon one of the horses, with his money-bag,
     while Jefferson Hope led the other along the precipitous and
     dangerous path.

     It was a bewildering route for anyone who was not accustomed to face
     Nature in her wildest moods. On the one side a great crag towered up
     a thousand feet or more, black, stern, and menacing, with long
     basaltic columns upon its rugged surface like the ribs of some
     petrified monster. On the other hand a wild chaos of boulders and
     debris made all advance impossible. Between the two ran the irregular
     track, so narrow in places that they had to travel in Indian file,
     and so rough that only practised riders could have traversed it at
     all. Yet in spite of all dangers and difficulties, the hearts of the
     fugitives were light within them, for every step increased the
     distance between them and the terrible despotism from which they were
     flying.

     They soon had a proof, however, that they were still within the
     jurisdiction of the Saints. They had reached the very wildest and
     most desolate portion of the pass when the girl gave a startled cry,
     and pointed upwards. On a rock which overlooked the track, showing
     out dark and plain against the sky, there stood a solitary sentinel.
     He saw them as soon as they perceived him, and his military challenge
     of "Who goes there?" rang through the silent ravine.

     "Travellers for Nevada," said Jefferson Hope, with his hand upon the
     rifle which hung by his saddle.

     They could see the lonely watcher fingering his gun, and peering down
     at them as if dissatisfied at their reply.

     "By whose permission?" he asked.

     "The Holy Four," answered Ferrier. His Mormon experiences had taught
     him that that was the highest authority to which he could refer.

     "Nine from seven," cried the sentinel.

     "Seven from five," returned Jefferson Hope promptly, remembering the
     countersign which he had heard in the garden.

     "Pass, and the Lord go with you," said the voice from above. Beyond
     his post the path broadened out, and the horses were able to break
     into a trot. Looking back, they could see the solitary watcher
     leaning upon his gun, and knew that they had passed the outlying post
     of the chosen people, and that freedom lay before them.





          CHAPTER V
          The Avenging Angels


     All night their course lay through intricate defiles and over
     irregular and rock-strewn paths. More than once they lost their way,
     but Hope's intimate knowledge of the mountains enabled them to regain
     the track once more. When morning broke, a scene of marvellous though
     savage beauty lay before them. In every direction the great
     snow-capped peaks hemmed them in, peeping over each other's shoulders
     to the far horizon. So steep were the rocky banks on either side of
     them, that the larch and the pine seemed to be suspended over their
     heads, and to need only a gust of wind to come hurtling down upon
     them. Nor was the fear entirely an illusion, for the barren valley
     was thickly strewn with trees and boulders which had fallen in a
     similar manner. Even as they passed, a great rock came thundering
     down with a hoarse rattle which woke the echoes in the silent gorges,
     and startled the weary horses into a gallop.

     As the sun rose slowly above the eastern horizon, the caps of the
     great mountains lit up one after the other, like lamps at a festival,
     until they were all ruddy and glowing. The magnificent spectacle
     cheered the hearts of the three fugitives and gave them fresh energy.
     At a wild torrent which swept out of a ravine they called a halt and
     watered their horses, while they partook of a hasty breakfast. Lucy
     and her father would fain have rested longer, but Jefferson Hope was
     inexorable. "They will be upon our track by this time," he said.
     "Everything depends upon our speed. Once safe in Carson we may rest
     for the remainder of our lives."

     During the whole of that day they struggled on through the defiles,
     and by evening they calculated that they were more than thirty miles
     from their enemies. At night-time they chose the base of a beetling
     crag, where the rocks offered some protection from the chill wind,
     and there huddled together for warmth, they enjoyed a few hours'
     sleep. Before daybreak, however, they were up and on their way once
     more. They had seen no signs of any pursuers, and Jefferson Hope
     began to think that they were fairly out of the reach of the terrible
     organization whose enmity they had incurred. He little knew how far
     that iron grasp could reach, or how soon it was to close upon them
     and crush them.

     About the middle of the second day of their flight their scanty store
     of provisions began to run out. This gave the hunter little
     uneasiness, however, for there was game to be had among the
     mountains, and he had frequently before had to depend upon his rifle
     for the needs of life. Choosing a sheltered nook, he piled together a
     few dried branches and made a blazing fire, at which his companions
     might warm themselves, for they were now nearly five thousand feet
     above the sea level, and the air was bitter and keen. Having tethered
     the horses, and bade Lucy adieu, he threw his gun over his shoulder,
     and set out in search of whatever chance might throw in his way.
     Looking back he saw the old man and the young girl crouching over the
     blazing fire, while the three animals stood motionless in the
     back-ground. Then the intervening rocks hid them from his view.

     He walked for a couple of miles through one ravine after another
     without success, though from the marks upon the bark of the trees,
     and other indications, he judged that there were numerous bears in
     the vicinity. At last, after two or three hours' fruitless search, he
     was thinking of turning back in despair, when casting his eyes
     upwards he saw a sight which sent a thrill of pleasure through his
     heart. On the edge of a jutting pinnacle, three or four hundred feet
     above him, there stood a creature somewhat resembling a sheep in
     appearance, but armed with a pair of gigantic horns. The
     big-horn--for so it is called--was acting, probably, as a guardian
     over a flock which were invisible to the hunter; but fortunately it
     was heading in the opposite direction, and had not perceived him.
     Lying on his face, he rested his rifle upon a rock, and took a long
     and steady aim before drawing the trigger. The animal sprang into the
     air, tottered for a moment upon the edge of the precipice, and then
     came crashing down into the valley beneath.

     The creature was too unwieldy to lift, so the hunter contented
     himself with cutting away one haunch and part of the flank. With this
     trophy over his shoulder, he hastened to retrace his steps, for the
     evening was already drawing in. He had hardly started, however,
     before he realized the difficulty which faced him. In his eagerness
     he had wandered far past the ravines which were known to him, and it
     was no easy matter to pick out the path which he had taken. The
     valley in which he found himself divided and sub-divided into many
     gorges, which were so like each other that it was impossible to
     distinguish one from the other. He followed one for a mile or more
     until he came to a mountain torrent which he was sure that he had
     never seen before. Convinced that he had taken the wrong turn, he
     tried another, but with the same result. Night was coming on rapidly,
     and it was almost dark before he at last found himself in a defile
     which was familiar to him. Even then it was no easy matter to keep to
     the right track, for the moon had not yet risen, and the high cliffs
     on either side made the obscurity more profound. Weighed down with
     his burden, and weary from his exertions, he stumbled along, keeping
     up his heart by the reflection that every step brought him nearer to
     Lucy, and that he carried with him enough to ensure them food for the
     remainder of their journey.

     He had now come to the mouth of the very defile in which he had left
     them. Even in the darkness he could recognize the outline of the
     cliffs which bounded it. They must, he reflected, be awaiting him
     anxiously, for he had been absent nearly five hours. In the gladness
     of his heart he put his hands to his mouth and made the glen re-echo
     to a loud halloo as a signal that he was coming. He paused and
     listened for an answer. None came save his own cry, which clattered
     up the dreary silent ravines, and was borne back to his ears in
     countless repetitions. Again he shouted, even louder than before, and
     again no whisper came back from the friends whom he had left such a
     short time ago. A vague, nameless dread came over him, and he hurried
     onwards frantically, dropping the precious food in his agitation.

     When he turned the corner, he came full in sight of the spot where
     the fire had been lit. There was still a glowing pile of wood ashes
     there, but it had evidently not been tended since his departure. The
     same dead silence still reigned all round. With his fears all changed
     to convictions, he hurried on. There was no living creature near the
     remains of the fire: animals, man, maiden, all were gone. It was only
     too clear that some sudden and terrible disaster had occurred during
     his absence--a disaster which had embraced them all, and yet had left
     no traces behind it.

     Bewildered and stunned by this blow, Jefferson Hope felt his head
     spin round, and had to lean upon his rifle to save himself from
     falling. He was essentially a man of action, however, and speedily
     recovered from his temporary impotence. Seizing a half-consumed piece
     of wood from the smouldering fire, he blew it into a flame, and
     proceeded with its help to examine the little camp. The ground was
     all stamped down by the feet of horses, showing that a large party of
     mounted men had overtaken the fugitives, and the direction of their
     tracks proved that they had afterwards turned back to Salt Lake City.
     Had they carried back both of his companions with them? Jefferson
     Hope had almost persuaded himself that they must have done so, when
     his eye fell upon an object which made every nerve of his body tingle
     within him. A little way on one side of the camp was a low-lying heap
     of reddish soil, which had assuredly not been there before. There was
     no mistaking it for anything but a newly-dug grave. As the young
     hunter approached it, he perceived that a stick had been planted on
     it, with a sheet of paper stuck in the cleft fork of it. The
     inscription upon the paper was brief, but to the point:

                                  JOHN FERRIER,
                           Formerly of Salt Lake City,
                             Died August 4th, 1860.
                                        

     The sturdy old man, whom he had left so short a time before, was
     gone, then, and this was all his epitaph. Jefferson Hope looked
     wildly round to see if there was a second grave, but there was no
     sign of one. Lucy had been carried back by their terrible pursuers to
     fulfil her original destiny, by becoming one of the harem of the
     Elder's son. As the young fellow realized the certainty of her fate,
     and his own powerlessness to prevent it, he wished that he, too, was
     lying with the old farmer in his last silent resting-place.

     Again, however, his active spirit shook off the lethargy which
     springs from despair. If there was nothing else left to him, he could
     at least devote his life to revenge. With indomitable patience and
     perseverance, Jefferson Hope possessed also a power of sustained
     vindictiveness, which he may have learned from the Indians amongst
     whom he had lived. As he stood by the desolate fire, he felt that the
     only one thing which could assuage his grief would be thorough and
     complete retribution, brought by his own hand upon his enemies. His
     strong will and untiring energy should, he determined, be devoted to
     that one end. With a grim, white face, he retraced his steps to where
     he had dropped the food, and having stirred up the smouldering fire,
     he cooked enough to last him for a few days. This he made up into a
     bundle, and, tired as he was, he set himself to walk back through the
     mountains upon the track of the avenging angels.

     For five days he toiled footsore and weary through the defiles which
     he had already traversed on horseback. At night he flung himself down
     among the rocks, and snatched a few hours of sleep; but before
     daybreak he was always well on his way. On the sixth day, he reached
     the Eagle Caon, from which they had commenced their ill-fated
     flight. Thence he could look down upon the home of the saints. Worn
     and exhausted, he leaned upon his rifle and shook his gaunt hand
     fiercely at the silent widespread city beneath him. As he looked at
     it, he observed that there were flags in some of the principal
     streets, and other signs of festivity. He was still speculating as to
     what this might mean when he heard the clatter of horse's hoofs, and
     saw a mounted man riding towards him. As he approached, he recognized
     him as a Mormon named Cowper, to whom he had rendered services at
     different times. He therefore accosted him when he got up to him,
     with the object of finding out what Lucy Ferrier's fate had been.

     "I am Jefferson Hope," he said. "You remember me."

     The Mormon looked at him with undisguised astonishment--indeed, it
     was difficult to recognize in this tattered, unkempt wanderer, with
     ghastly white face and fierce, wild eyes, the spruce young hunter of
     former days. Having, however, at last, satisfied himself as to his
     identity, the man's surprise changed to consternation.

     "You are mad to come here," he cried. "It is as much as my own life
     is worth to be seen talking with you. There is a warrant against you
     from the Holy Four for assisting the Ferriers away."

     "I don't fear them, or their warrant," Hope said, earnestly. "You
     must know something of this matter, Cowper. I conjure you by
     everything you hold dear to answer a few questions. We have always
     been friends. For God's sake, don't refuse to answer me."

     "What is it?" the Mormon asked uneasily. "Be quick. The very rocks
     have ears and the trees eyes."

     "What has become of Lucy Ferrier?"

     "She was married yesterday to young Drebber. Hold up, man, hold up,
     you have no life left in you."

     "Don't mind me," said Hope faintly. He was white to the very lips,
     and had sunk down on the stone against which he had been leaning.
     "Married, you say?"

     "Married yesterday--that's what those flags are for on the Endowment
     House. There was some words between young Drebber and young
     Stangerson as to which was to have her. They'd both been in the party
     that followed them, and Stangerson had shot her father, which seemed
     to give him the best claim; but when they argued it out in council,
     Drebber's party was the stronger, so the Prophet gave her over to
     him. No one won't have her very long though, for I saw death in her
     face yesterday. She is more like a ghost than a woman. Are you off,
     then?"

     "Yes, I am off," said Jefferson Hope, who had risen from his seat.
     His face might have been chiselled out of marble, so hard and set was
     its expression, while its eyes glowed with a baleful light.

     "Where are you going?"

     "Never mind," he answered; and, slinging his weapon over his
     shoulder, strode off down the gorge and so away into the heart of the
     mountains to the haunts of the wild beasts. Amongst them all there
     was none so fierce and so dangerous as himself.

     The prediction of the Mormon was only too well fulfilled. Whether it
     was the terrible death of her father or the effects of the hateful
     marriage into which she had been forced, poor Lucy never held up her
     head again, but pined away and died within a month. Her sottish
     husband, who had married her principally for the sake of John
     Ferrier's property, did not affect any great grief at his
     bereavement; but his other wives mourned over her, and sat up with
     her the night before the burial, as is the Mormon custom. They were
     grouped round the bier in the early hours of the morning, when, to
     their inexpressible fear and astonishment, the door was flung open,
     and a savage-looking, weather-beaten man in tattered garments strode
     into the room. Without a glance or a word to the cowering women, he
     walked up to the white silent figure which had once contained the
     pure soul of Lucy Ferrier. Stooping over her, he pressed his lips
     reverently to her cold forehead, and then, snatching up her hand, he
     took the wedding-ring from her finger. "She shall not be buried in
     that," he cried with a fierce snarl, and before an alarm could be
     raised sprang down the stairs and was gone. So strange and so brief
     was the episode, that the watchers might have found it hard to
     believe it themselves or persuade other people of it, had it not been
     for the undeniable fact that the circlet of gold which marked her as
     having been a bride had disappeared.

     For some months Jefferson Hope lingered among the mountains, leading
     a strange wild life, and nursing in his heart the fierce desire for
     vengeance which possessed him. Tales were told in the City of the
     weird figure which was seen prowling about the suburbs, and which
     haunted the lonely mountain gorges. Once a bullet whistled through
     Stangerson's window and flattened itself upon the wall within a foot
     of him. On another occasion, as Drebber passed under a cliff a great
     boulder crashed down on him, and he only escaped a terrible death by
     throwing himself upon his face. The two young Mormons were not long
     in discovering the reason of these attempts upon their lives, and led
     repeated expeditions into the mountains in the hope of capturing or
     killing their enemy, but always without success. Then they adopted
     the precaution of never going out alone or after nightfall, and of
     having their houses guarded. After a time they were able to relax
     these measures, for nothing was either heard or seen of their
     opponent, and they hoped that time had cooled his vindictiveness.

     Far from doing so, it had, if anything, augmented it. The hunter's
     mind was of a hard, unyielding nature, and the predominant idea of
     revenge had taken such complete possession of it that there was no
     room for any other emotion. He was, however, above all things
     practical. He soon realized that even his iron constitution could not
     stand the incessant strain which he was putting upon it. Exposure and
     want of wholesome food were wearing him out. If he died like a dog
     among the mountains, what was to become of his revenge then? And yet
     such a death was sure to overtake him if he persisted. He felt that
     that was to play his enemy's game, so he reluctantly returned to the
     old Nevada mines, there to recruit his health and to amass money
     enough to allow him to pursue his object without privation.

     His intention had been to be absent a year at the most, but a
     combination of unforeseen circumstances prevented his leaving the
     mines for nearly five. At the end of that time, however, his memory
     of his wrongs and his craving for revenge were quite as keen as on
     that memorable night when he had stood by John Ferrier's grave.
     Disguised, and under an assumed name, he returned to Salt Lake City,
     careless what became of his own life, as long as he obtained what he
     knew to be justice. There he found evil tidings awaiting him. There
     had been a schism among the Chosen People a few months before, some
     of the younger members of the Church having rebelled against the
     authority of the Elders, and the result had been the secession of a
     certain number of the malcontents, who had left Utah and become
     Gentiles. Among these had been Drebber and Stangerson; and no one
     knew whither they had gone. Rumour reported that Drebber had managed
     to convert a large part of his property into money, and that he had
     departed a wealthy man, while his companion, Stangerson, was
     comparatively poor. There was no clue at all, however, as to their
     whereabouts.

     Many a man, however vindictive, would have abandoned all thought of
     revenge in the face of such a difficulty, but Jefferson Hope never
     faltered for a moment. With the small competence he possessed, eked
     out by such employment as he could pick up, he travelled from town to
     town through the United States in quest of his enemies. Year passed
     into year, his black hair turned grizzled, but still he wandered on,
     a human bloodhound, with his mind wholly set upon the one object upon
     which he had devoted his life. At last his perseverance was rewarded.
     It was but a glance of a face in a window, but that one glance told
     him that Cleveland in Ohio possessed the men whom he was in pursuit
     of. He returned to his miserable lodgings with his plan of vengeance
     all arranged. It chanced, however, that Drebber, looking from his
     window, had recognized the vagrant in the street, and had read murder
     in his eyes. He hurried before a justice of the peace, accompanied by
     Stangerson, who had become his private secretary, and represented to
     him that they were in danger of their lives from the jealousy and
     hatred of an old rival. That evening Jefferson Hope was taken into
     custody, and not being able to find sureties, was detained for some
     weeks. When at last he was liberated, it was only to find that
     Drebber's house was deserted, and that he and his secretary had
     departed for Europe.

     Again the avenger had been foiled, and again his concentrated hatred
     urged him to continue the pursuit. Funds were wanting, however, and
     for some time he had to return to work, saving every dollar for his
     approaching journey. At last, having collected enough to keep life in
     him, he departed for Europe, and tracked his enemies from city to
     city, working his way in any menial capacity, but never overtaking
     the fugitives. When he reached St. Petersburg they had departed for
     Paris; and when he followed them there he learned that they had just
     set off for Copenhagen. At the Danish capital he was again a few days
     late, for they had journeyed on to London, where he at last succeeded
     in running them to earth. As to what occurred there, we cannot do
     better than quote the old hunter's own account, as duly recorded in
     Dr. Watson's Journal, to which we are already under such obligations.





          CHAPTER VI
          A Continuation Of The Reminiscences Of John Watson, M.D.


     Our prisoner's furious resistance did not apparently indicate any
     ferocity in his disposition towards ourselves, for on finding himself
     powerless, he smiled in an affable manner, and expressed his hopes
     that he had not hurt any of us in the scuffle. "I guess you're going
     to take me to the police-station," he remarked to Sherlock Holmes.
     "My cab's at the door. If you'll loose my legs I'll walk down to it.
     I'm not so light to lift as I used to be."

     Gregson and Lestrade exchanged glances as if they thought this
     proposition rather a bold one; but Holmes at once took the prisoner
     at his word, and loosened the towel which we had bound round his
     ankles. He rose and stretched his legs, as though to assure himself
     that they were free once more. I remember that I thought to myself,
     as I eyed him, that I had seldom seen a more powerfully built man;
     and his dark sunburned face bore an expression of determination and
     energy which was as formidable as his personal strength.

     "If there's a vacant place for a chief of the police, I reckon you
     are the man for it," he said, gazing with undisguised admiration at
     my fellow-lodger. "The way you kept on my trail was a caution."

     "You had better come with me," said Holmes to the two detectives.

     "I can drive you," said Lestrade.

     "Good! and Gregson can come inside with me. You too, Doctor, you have
     taken an interest in the case and may as well stick to us."

     I assented gladly, and we all descended together. Our prisoner made
     no attempt at escape, but stepped calmly into the cab which had been
     his, and we followed him. Lestrade mounted the box, whipped up the
     horse, and brought us in a very short time to our destination. We
     were ushered into a small chamber where a police Inspector noted down
     our prisoner's name and the names of the men with whose murder he had
     been charged. The official was a white-faced unemotional man, who
     went through his duties in a dull mechanical way. "The prisoner will
     be put before the magistrates in the course of the week," he said;
     "in the mean time, Mr. Jefferson Hope, have you anything that you
     wish to say? I must warn you that your words will be taken down, and
     may be used against you."

     "I've got a good deal to say," our prisoner said slowly. "I want to
     tell you gentlemen all about it."

     "Hadn't you better reserve that for your trial?" asked the Inspector.

     "I may never be tried," he answered. "You needn't look startled. It
     isn't suicide I am thinking of. Are you a Doctor?" He turned his
     fierce dark eyes upon me as he asked this last question.

     "Yes; I am," I answered.

     "Then put your hand here," he said, with a smile, motioning with his
     manacled wrists towards his chest.

     I did so; and became at once conscious of an extraordinary throbbing
     and commotion which was going on inside. The walls of his chest
     seemed to thrill and quiver as a frail building would do inside when
     some powerful engine was at work. In the silence of the room I could
     hear a dull humming and buzzing noise which proceeded from the same
     source.

     "Why," I cried, "you have an aortic aneurism!"

     "That's what they call it," he said, placidly. "I went to a Doctor
     last week about it, and he told me that it is bound to burst before
     many days passed. It has been getting worse for years. I got it from
     over-exposure and under-feeding among the Salt Lake Mountains. I've
     done my work now, and I don't care how soon I go, but I should like
     to leave some account of the business behind me. I don't want to be
     remembered as a common cut-throat."

     The Inspector and the two detectives had a hurried discussion as to
     the advisability of allowing him to tell his story.

     "Do you consider, Doctor, that there is immediate danger?" the former
     asked.

     "Most certainly there is," I answered.

     "In that case it is clearly our duty, in the interests of justice, to
     take his statement," said the Inspector. "You are at liberty, sir, to
     give your account, which I again warn you will be taken down."

     "I'll sit down, with your leave," the prisoner said, suiting the
     action to the word. "This aneurism of mine makes me easily tired, and
     the tussle we had half an hour ago has not mended matters. I'm on the
     brink of the grave, and I am not likely to lie to you. Every word I
     say is the absolute truth, and how you use it is a matter of no
     consequence to me."

     With these words, Jefferson Hope leaned back in his chair and began
     the following remarkable statement. He spoke in a calm and methodical
     manner, as though the events which he narrated were commonplace
     enough. I can vouch for the accuracy of the subjoined account, for I
     have had access to Lestrade's note-book, in which the prisoner's
     words were taken down exactly as they were uttered.

     "It don't much matter to you why I hated these men," he said; "it's
     enough that they were guilty of the death of two human beings--a
     father and a daughter--and that they had, therefore, forfeited their
     own lives. After the lapse of time that has passed since their crime,
     it was impossible for me to secure a conviction against them in any
     court. I knew of their guilt though, and I determined that I should
     be judge, jury, and executioner all rolled into one. You'd have done
     the same, if you have any manhood in you, if you had been in my
     place.

     "That girl that I spoke of was to have married me twenty years ago.
     She was forced into marrying that same Drebber, and broke her heart
     over it. I took the marriage ring from her dead finger, and I vowed
     that his dying eyes should rest upon that very ring, and that his
     last thoughts should be of the crime for which he was punished. I
     have carried it about with me, and have followed him and his
     accomplice over two continents until I caught them. They thought to
     tire me out, but they could not do it. If I die to-morrow, as is
     likely enough, I die knowing that my work in this world is done, and
     well done. They have perished, and by my hand. There is nothing left
     for me to hope for, or to desire.

     "They were rich and I was poor, so that it was no easy matter for me
     to follow them. When I got to London my pocket was about empty, and I
     found that I must turn my hand to something for my living. Driving
     and riding are as natural to me as walking, so I applied at a
     cabowner's office, and soon got employment. I was to bring a certain
     sum a week to the owner, and whatever was over that I might keep for
     myself. There was seldom much over, but I managed to scrape along
     somehow. The hardest job was to learn my way about, for I reckon that
     of all the mazes that ever were contrived, this city is the most
     confusing. I had a map beside me though, and when once I had spotted
     the principal hotels and stations, I got on pretty well.

     "It was some time before I found out where my two gentlemen were
     living; but I inquired and inquired until at last I dropped across
     them. They were at a boarding-house at Camberwell, over on the other
     side of the river. When once I found them out I knew that I had them
     at my mercy. I had grown my beard, and there was no chance of their
     recognizing me. I would dog them and follow them until I saw my
     opportunity. I was determined that they should not escape me again.

     "They were very near doing it for all that. Go where they would about
     London, I was always at their heels. Sometimes I followed them on my
     cab, and sometimes on foot, but the former was the best, for then
     they could not get away from me. It was only early in the morning or
     late at night that I could earn anything, so that I began to get
     behind hand with my employer. I did not mind that, however, as long
     as I could lay my hand upon the men I wanted.

     "They were very cunning, though. They must have thought that there
     was some chance of their being followed, for they would never go out
     alone, and never after nightfall. During two weeks I drove behind
     them every day, and never once saw them separate. Drebber himself was
     drunk half the time, but Stangerson was not to be caught napping. I
     watched them late and early, but never saw the ghost of a chance; but
     I was not discouraged, for something told me that the hour had almost
     come. My only fear was that this thing in my chest might burst a
     little too soon and leave my work undone.

     "At last, one evening I was driving up and down Torquay Terrace, as
     the street was called in which they boarded, when I saw a cab drive
     up to their door. Presently some luggage was brought out, and after a
     time Drebber and Stangerson followed it, and drove off. I whipped up
     my horse and kept within sight of them, feeling very ill at ease, for
     I feared that they were going to shift their quarters. At Euston
     Station they got out, and I left a boy to hold my horse, and followed
     them on to the platform. I heard them ask for the Liverpool train,
     and the guard answer that one had just gone and there would not be
     another for some hours. Stangerson seemed to be put out at that, but
     Drebber was rather pleased than otherwise. I got so close to them in
     the bustle that I could hear every word that passed between them.
     Drebber said that he had a little business of his own to do, and that
     if the other would wait for him he would soon rejoin him. His
     companion remonstrated with him, and reminded him that they had
     resolved to stick together. Drebber answered that the matter was a
     delicate one, and that he must go alone. I could not catch what
     Stangerson said to that, but the other burst out swearing, and
     reminded him that he was nothing more than his paid servant, and that
     he must not presume to dictate to him. On that the Secretary gave it
     up as a bad job, and simply bargained with him that if he missed the
     last train he should rejoin him at Halliday's Private Hotel; to which
     Drebber answered that he would be back on the platform before eleven,
     and made his way out of the station.

     "The moment for which I had waited so long had at last come. I had my
     enemies within my power. Together they could protect each other, but
     singly they were at my mercy. I did not act, however, with undue
     precipitation. My plans were already formed. There is no satisfaction
     in vengeance unless the offender has time to realize who it is that
     strikes him, and why retribution has come upon him. I had my plans
     arranged by which I should have the opportunity of making the man who
     had wronged me understand that his old sin had found him out. It
     chanced that some days before a gentleman who had been engaged in
     looking over some houses in the Brixton Road had dropped the key of
     one of them in my carriage. It was claimed that same evening, and
     returned; but in the interval I had taken a moulding of it, and had a
     duplicate constructed. By means of this I had access to at least one
     spot in this great city where I could rely upon being free from
     interruption. How to get Drebber to that house was the difficult
     problem which I had now to solve.

     "He walked down the road and went into one or two liquor shops,
     staying for nearly half-an-hour in the last of them. When he came out
     he staggered in his walk, and was evidently pretty well on. There was
     a hansom just in front of me, and he hailed it. I followed it so
     close that the nose of my horse was within a yard of his driver the
     whole way. We rattled across Waterloo Bridge and through miles of
     streets, until, to my astonishment, we found ourselves back in the
     Terrace in which he had boarded. I could not imagine what his
     intention was in returning there; but I went on and pulled up my cab
     a hundred yards or so from the house. He entered it, and his hansom
     drove away. Give me a glass of water, if you please. My mouth gets
     dry with the talking."

     I handed him the glass, and he drank it down.

     "That's better," he said. "Well, I waited for a quarter of an hour,
     or more, when suddenly there came a noise like people struggling
     inside the house. Next moment the door was flung open and two men
     appeared, one of whom was Drebber, and the other was a young chap
     whom I had never seen before. This fellow had Drebber by the collar,
     and when they came to the head of the steps he gave him a shove and a
     kick which sent him half across the road. 'You hound,' he cried,
     shaking his stick at him; 'I'll teach you to insult an honest girl!'
     He was so hot that I think he would have thrashed Drebber with his
     cudgel, only that the cur staggered away down the road as fast as his
     legs would carry him. He ran as far as the corner, and then, seeing
     my cab, he hailed me and jumped in. 'Drive me to Halliday's Private
     Hotel,' said he.

     "When I had him fairly inside my cab, my heart jumped so with joy
     that I feared lest at this last moment my aneurism might go wrong. I
     drove along slowly, weighing in my own mind what it was best to do. I
     might take him right out into the country, and there in some deserted
     lane have my last interview with him. I had almost decided upon this,
     when he solved the problem for me. The craze for drink had seized him
     again, and he ordered me to pull up outside a gin palace. He went in,
     leaving word that I should wait for him. There he remained until
     closing time, and when he came out he was so far gone that I knew the
     game was in my own hands.

     "Don't imagine that I intended to kill him in cold blood. It would
     only have been rigid justice if I had done so, but I could not bring
     myself to do it. I had long determined that he should have a show for
     his life if he chose to take advantage of it. Among the many billets
     which I have filled in America during my wandering life, I was once
     janitor and sweeper out of the laboratory at York College. One day
     the professor was lecturing on poisons, and he showed his students
     some alkaloid, as he called it, which he had extracted from some
     South American arrow poison, and which was so powerful that the least
     grain meant instant death. I spotted the bottle in which this
     preparation was kept, and when they were all gone, I helped myself to
     a little of it. I was a fairly good dispenser, so I worked this
     alkaloid into small, soluble pills, and each pill I put in a box with
     a similar pill made without the poison. I determined at the time that
     when I had my chance, my gentlemen should each have a draw out of one
     of these boxes, while I ate the pill that remained. It would be quite
     as deadly, and a good deal less noisy than firing across a
     handkerchief. From that day I had always my pill boxes about with me,
     and the time had now come when I was to use them.

     "It was nearer one than twelve, and a wild, bleak night, blowing hard
     and raining in torrents. Dismal as it was outside, I was glad
     within--so glad that I could have shouted out from pure exultation.
     If any of you gentlemen have ever pined for a thing, and longed for
     it during twenty long years, and then suddenly found it within your
     reach, you would understand my feelings. I lit a cigar, and puffed at
     it to steady my nerves, but my hands were trembling, and my temples
     throbbing with excitement. As I drove, I could see old John Ferrier
     and sweet Lucy looking at me out of the darkness and smiling at me,
     just as plain as I see you all in this room. All the way they were
     ahead of me, one on each side of the horse until I pulled up at the
     house in the Brixton Road.

     "There was not a soul to be seen, nor a sound to be heard, except the
     dripping of the rain. When I looked in at the window, I found Drebber
     all huddled together in a drunken sleep. I shook him by the arm,
     'It's time to get out,' I said.

     "'All right, cabby,' said he.

     "I suppose he thought we had come to the hotel that he had mentioned,
     for he got out without another word, and followed me down the garden.
     I had to walk beside him to keep him steady, for he was still a
     little top-heavy. When we came to the door, I opened it, and led him
     into the front room. I give you my word that all the way, the father
     and the daughter were walking in front of us.

     "'It's infernally dark,' said he, stamping about.

     "'We'll soon have a light,' I said, striking a match and putting it
     to a wax candle which I had brought with me. 'Now, Enoch Drebber,' I
     continued, turning to him, and holding the light to my own face, 'who
     am I?'

     "He gazed at me with bleared, drunken eyes for a moment, and then I
     saw a horror spring up in them, and convulse his whole features,
     which showed me that he knew me. He staggered back with a livid face,
     and I saw the perspiration break out upon his brow, while his teeth
     chattered in his head. At the sight, I leaned my back against the
     door and laughed loud and long. I had always known that vengeance
     would be sweet, but I had never hoped for the contentment of soul
     which now possessed me.

     "'You dog!' I said; 'I have hunted you from Salt Lake City to St.
     Petersburg, and you have always escaped me. Now, at last your
     wanderings have come to an end, for either you or I shall never see
     to-morrow's sun rise.' He shrunk still further away as I spoke, and I
     could see on his face that he thought I was mad. So I was for the
     time. The pulses in my temples beat like sledge-hammers, and I
     believe I would have had a fit of some sort if the blood had not
     gushed from my nose and relieved me.

     "'What do you think of Lucy Ferrier now?' I cried, locking the door,
     and shaking the key in his face. 'Punishment has been slow in coming,
     but it has overtaken you at last.' I saw his coward lips tremble as I
     spoke. He would have begged for his life, but he knew well that it
     was useless.

     "'Would you murder me?' he stammered.

     "'There is no murder,' I answered. 'Who talks of murdering a mad dog?
     What mercy had you upon my poor darling, when you dragged her from
     her slaughtered father, and bore her away to your accursed and
     shameless harem.'

     "'It was not I who killed her father,' he cried.

     "'But it was you who broke her innocent heart,' I shrieked, thrusting
     the box before him. 'Let the high God judge between us. Choose and
     eat. There is death in one and life in the other. I shall take what
     you leave. Let us see if there is justice upon the earth, or if we
     are ruled by chance.'

     "He cowered away with wild cries and prayers for mercy, but I drew my
     knife and held it to his throat until he had obeyed me. Then I
     swallowed the other, and we stood facing one another in silence for a
     minute or more, waiting to see which was to live and which was to
     die. Shall I ever forget the look which came over his face when the
     first warning pangs told him that the poison was in his system? I
     laughed as I saw it, and held Lucy's marriage ring in front of his
     eyes. It was but for a moment, for the action of the alkaloid is
     rapid. A spasm of pain contorted his features; he threw his hands out
     in front of him, staggered, and then, with a hoarse cry, fell heavily
     upon the floor. I turned him over with my foot, and placed my hand
     upon his heart. There was no movement. He was dead!

     "The blood had been streaming from my nose, but I had taken no notice
     of it. I don't know what it was that put it into my head to write
     upon the wall with it. Perhaps it was some mischievous idea of
     setting the police upon a wrong track, for I felt light-hearted and
     cheerful. I remembered a German being found in New York with RACHE
     written up above him, and it was argued at the time in the newspapers
     that the secret societies must have done it. I guessed that what
     puzzled the New Yorkers would puzzle the Londoners, so I dipped my
     finger in my own blood and printed it on a convenient place on the
     wall. Then I walked down to my cab and found that there was nobody
     about, and that the night was still very wild. I had driven some
     distance when I put my hand into the pocket in which I usually kept
     Lucy's ring, and found that it was not there. I was thunderstruck at
     this, for it was the only memento that I had of her. Thinking that I
     might have dropped it when I stooped over Drebber's body, I drove
     back, and leaving my cab in a side street, I went boldly up to the
     house--for I was ready to dare anything rather than lose the ring.
     When I arrived there, I walked right into the arms of a
     police-officer who was coming out, and only managed to disarm his
     suspicions by pretending to be hopelessly drunk.

     "That was how Enoch Drebber came to his end. All I had to do then was
     to do as much for Stangerson, and so pay off John Ferrier's debt. I
     knew that he was staying at Halliday's Private Hotel, and I hung
     about all day, but he never came out. I fancy that he suspected
     something when Drebber failed to put in an appearance. He was
     cunning, was Stangerson, and always on his guard. If he thought he
     could keep me off by staying indoors he was very much mistaken. I
     soon found out which was the window of his bedroom, and early next
     morning I took advantage of some ladders which were lying in the lane
     behind the hotel, and so made my way into his room in the grey of the
     dawn. I woke him up and told him that the hour had come when he was
     to answer for the life he had taken so long before. I described
     Drebber's death to him, and I gave him the same choice of the
     poisoned pills. Instead of grasping at the chance of safety which
     that offered him, he sprang from his bed and flew at my throat. In
     self-defence I stabbed him to the heart. It would have been the same
     in any case, for Providence would never have allowed his guilty hand
     to pick out anything but the poison.

     "I have little more to say, and it's as well, for I am about done up.
     I went on cabbing it for a day or so, intending to keep at it until I
     could save enough to take me back to America. I was standing in the
     yard when a ragged youngster asked if there was a cabby there called
     Jefferson Hope, and said that his cab was wanted by a gentleman at
     221b, Baker Street. I went round, suspecting no harm, and the next
     thing I knew, this young man here had the bracelets on my wrists, and
     as neatly snackled as ever I saw in my life. That's the whole of my
     story, gentlemen. You may consider me to be a murderer; but I hold
     that I am just as much an officer of justice as you are."

     So thrilling had the man's narrative been, and his manner was so
     impressive that we had sat silent and absorbed. Even the professional
     detectives, blase as they were in every detail of crime, appeared to
     be keenly interested in the man's story. When he finished we sat for
     some minutes in a stillness which was only broken by the scratching
     of Lestrade's pencil as he gave the finishing touches to his
     shorthand account.

     "There is only one point on which I should like a little more
     information," Sherlock Holmes said at last. "Who was your accomplice
     who came for the ring which I advertised?"

     The prisoner winked at my friend jocosely. "I can tell my own
     secrets," he said, "but I don't get other people into trouble. I saw
     your advertisement, and I thought it might be a plant, or it might be
     the ring which I wanted. My friend volunteered to go and see. I think
     you'll own he did it smartly."

     "Not a doubt of that," said Holmes heartily.

     "Now, gentlemen," the Inspector remarked gravely, "the forms of the
     law must be complied with. On Thursday the prisoner will be brought
     before the magistrates, and your attendance will be required. Until
     then I will be responsible for him." He rang the bell as he spoke,
     and Jefferson Hope was led off by a couple of warders, while my
     friend and I made our way out of the Station and took a cab back to
     Baker Street.





          CHAPTER VII
          The Conclusion


     We had all been warned to appear before the magistrates upon the
     Thursday; but when the Thursday came there was no occasion for our
     testimony. A higher Judge had taken the matter in hand, and Jefferson
     Hope had been summoned before a tribunal where strict justice would
     be meted out to him. On the very night after his capture the aneurism
     burst, and he was found in the morning stretched upon the floor of
     the cell, with a placid smile upon his face, as though he had been
     able in his dying moments to look back upon a useful life, and on
     work well done.

     "Gregson and Lestrade will be wild about his death," Holmes remarked,
     as we chatted it over next evening. "Where will their grand
     advertisement be now?"

     "I don't see that they had very much to do with his capture," I
     answered.

     "What you do in this world is a matter of no consequence," returned
     my companion, bitterly. "The question is, what can you make people
     believe that you have done. Never mind," he continued, more brightly,
     after a pause. "I would not have missed the investigation for
     anything. There has been no better case within my recollection.
     Simple as it was, there were several most instructive points about
     it."

     "Simple!" I ejaculated.

     "Well, really, it can hardly be described as otherwise," said
     Sherlock Holmes, smiling at my surprise. "The proof of its intrinsic
     simplicity is, that without any help save a few very ordinary
     deductions I was able to lay my hand upon the criminal within three
     days."

     "That is true," said I.

     "I have already explained to you that what is out of the common is
     usually a guide rather than a hindrance. In solving a problem of this
     sort, the grand thing is to be able to reason backwards. That is a
     very useful accomplishment, and a very easy one, but people do not
     practise it much. In the every-day affairs of life it is more useful
     to reason forwards, and so the other comes to be neglected. There are
     fifty who can reason synthetically for one who can reason
     analytically."

     "I confess," said I, "that I do not quite follow you."

     "I hardly expected that you would. Let me see if I can make it
     clearer. Most people, if you describe a train of events to them, will
     tell you what the result would be. They can put those events together
     in their minds, and argue from them that something will come to pass.
     There are few people, however, who, if you told them a result, would
     be able to evolve from their own inner consciousness what the steps
     were which led up to that result. This power is what I mean when I
     talk of reasoning backwards, or analytically."

     "I understand," said I.

     "Now this was a case in which you were given the result and had to
     find everything else for yourself. Now let me endeavour to show you
     the different steps in my reasoning. To begin at the beginning. I
     approached the house, as you know, on foot, and with my mind entirely
     free from all impressions. I naturally began by examining the
     roadway, and there, as I have already explained to you, I saw clearly
     the marks of a cab, which, I ascertained by inquiry, must have been
     there during the night. I satisfied myself that it was a cab and not
     a private carriage by the narrow gauge of the wheels. The ordinary
     London growler is considerably less wide than a gentleman's brougham.

     "This was the first point gained. I then walked slowly down the
     garden path, which happened to be composed of a clay soil, peculiarly
     suitable for taking impressions. No doubt it appeared to you to be a
     mere trampled line of slush, but to my trained eyes every mark upon
     its surface had a meaning. There is no branch of detective science
     which is so important and so much neglected as the art of tracing
     footsteps. Happily, I have always laid great stress upon it, and much
     practice has made it second nature to me. I saw the heavy footmarks
     of the constables, but I saw also the track of the two men who had
     first passed through the garden. It was easy to tell that they had
     been before the others, because in places their marks had been
     entirely obliterated by the others coming upon the top of them. In
     this way my second link was formed, which told me that the nocturnal
     visitors were two in number, one remarkable for his height (as I
     calculated from the length of his stride), and the other fashionably
     dressed, to judge from the small and elegant impression left by his
     boots.

     "On entering the house this last inference was confirmed. My
     well-booted man lay before me. The tall one, then, had done the
     murder, if murder there was. There was no wound upon the dead man's
     person, but the agitated expression upon his face assured me that he
     had foreseen his fate before it came upon him. Men who die from heart
     disease, or any sudden natural cause, never by any chance exhibit
     agitation upon their features. Having sniffed the dead man's lips I
     detected a slightly sour smell, and I came to the conclusion that he
     had had poison forced upon him. Again, I argued that it had been
     forced upon him from the hatred and fear expressed upon his face. By
     the method of exclusion, I had arrived at this result, for no other
     hypothesis would meet the facts. Do not imagine that it was a very
     unheard of idea. The forcible administration of poison is by no means
     a new thing in criminal annals. The cases of Dolsky in Odessa, and of
     Leturier in Montpellier, will occur at once to any toxicologist.

     "And now came the great question as to the reason why. Robbery had
     not been the object of the murder, for nothing was taken. Was it
     politics, then, or was it a woman? That was the question which
     confronted me. I was inclined from the first to the latter
     supposition. Political assassins are only too glad to do their work
     and to fly. This murder had, on the contrary, been done most
     deliberately, and the perpetrator had left his tracks all over the
     room, showing that he had been there all the time. It must have been
     a private wrong, and not a political one, which called for such a
     methodical revenge. When the inscription was discovered upon the wall
     I was more inclined than ever to my opinion. The thing was too
     evidently a blind. When the ring was found, however, it settled the
     question. Clearly the murderer had used it to remind his victim of
     some dead or absent woman. It was at this point that I asked Gregson
     whether he had enquired in his telegram to Cleveland as to any
     particular point in Mr. Drebber's former career. He answered, you
     remember, in the negative.

     "I then proceeded to make a careful examination of the room, which
     confirmed me in my opinion as to the murderer's height, and furnished
     me with the additional details as to the Trichinopoly cigar and the
     length of his nails. I had already come to the conclusion, since
     there were no signs of a struggle, that the blood which covered the
     floor had burst from the murderer's nose in his excitement. I could
     perceive that the track of blood coincided with the track of his
     feet. It is seldom that any man, unless he is very full-blooded,
     breaks out in this way through emotion, so I hazarded the opinion
     that the criminal was probably a robust and ruddy-faced man. Events
     proved that I had judged correctly.

     "Having left the house, I proceeded to do what Gregson had neglected.
     I telegraphed to the head of the police at Cleveland, limiting my
     enquiry to the circumstances connected with the marriage of Enoch
     Drebber. The answer was conclusive. It told me that Drebber had
     already applied for the protection of the law against an old rival in
     love, named Jefferson Hope, and that this same Hope was at present in
     Europe. I knew now that I held the clue to the mystery in my hand,
     and all that remained was to secure the murderer.

     "I had already determined in my own mind that the man who had walked
     into the house with Drebber, was none other than the man who had
     driven the cab. The marks in the road showed me that the horse had
     wandered on in a way which would have been impossible had there been
     anyone in charge of it. Where, then, could the driver be, unless he
     were inside the house? Again, it is absurd to suppose that any sane
     man would carry out a deliberate crime under the very eyes, as it
     were, of a third person, who was sure to betray him. Lastly,
     supposing one man wished to dog another through London, what better
     means could he adopt than to turn cabdriver. All these considerations
     led me to the irresistible conclusion that Jefferson Hope was to be
     found among the jarveys of the Metropolis.

     "If he had been one there was no reason to believe that he had ceased
     to be. On the contrary, from his point of view, any sudden chance
     would be likely to draw attention to himself. He would, probably, for
     a time at least, continue to perform his duties. There was no reason
     to suppose that he was going under an assumed name. Why should he
     change his name in a country where no one knew his original one? I
     therefore organized my Street Arab detective corps, and sent them
     systematically to every cab proprietor in London until they ferreted
     out the man that I wanted. How well they succeeded, and how quickly I
     took advantage of it, are still fresh in your recollection. The
     murder of Stangerson was an incident which was entirely unexpected,
     but which could hardly in any case have been prevented. Through it,
     as you know, I came into possession of the pills, the existence of
     which I had already surmised. You see the whole thing is a chain of
     logical sequences without a break or flaw."

     "It is wonderful!" I cried. "Your merits should be publicly
     recognized. You should publish an account of the case. If you won't,
     I will for you."

     "You may do what you like, Doctor," he answered. "See here!" he
     continued, handing a paper over to me, "look at this!"

     It was the Echo for the day, and the paragraph to which he pointed
     was devoted to the case in question.

     "The public," it said, "have lost a sensational treat through the
     sudden death of the man Hope, who was suspected of the murder of Mr.
     Enoch Drebber and of Mr. Joseph Stangerson. The details of the case
     will probably be never known now, though we are informed upon good
     authority that the crime was the result of an old standing and
     romantic feud, in which love and Mormonism bore a part. It seems that
     both the victims belonged, in their younger days, to the Latter Day
     Saints, and Hope, the deceased prisoner, hails also from Salt Lake
     City. If the case has had no other effect, it, at least, brings out
     in the most striking manner the efficiency of our detective police
     force, and will serve as a lesson to all foreigners that they will do
     wisely to settle their feuds at home, and not to carry them on to
     British soil. It is an open secret that the credit of this smart
     capture belongs entirely to the well-known Scotland Yard officials,
     Messrs. Lestrade and Gregson. The man was apprehended, it appears, in
     the rooms of a certain Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who has himself, as an
     amateur, shown some talent in the detective line, and who, with such
     instructors, may hope in time to attain to some degree of their
     skill. It is expected that a testimonial of some sort will be
     presented to the two officers as a fitting recognition of their
     services."

     "Didn't I tell you so when we started?" cried Sherlock Holmes with a
     laugh. "That's the result of all our Study in Scarlet: to get them a
     testimonial!"

     "Never mind," I answered, "I have all the facts in my journal, and
     the public shall know them. In the meantime you must make yourself
     contented by the consciousness of success, like the Roman miser--

                      "'Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo
                 Ipse domi simul ac nummos contemplar in arca.'"







                               THE VALLEY OF FEAR

                               Arthur Conan Doyle







                                Table of contents

         Part I
        The Warning
        Sherlock Holmes Discourses
        The Tragedy of Birlstone
        Darkness
        The People Of the Drama
        A Dawning Light
        The Solution

         Part II
        The Man
        The Bodymaster
        Lodge 341, Vermissa
        The Valley of Fear
        The Darkest Hour
        Danger
        The Trapping of Birdy Edwards
        Epilogue



















                                      PART I

                            The Tragedy of Birlstone





          CHAPTER I
          The Warning


     "I am inclined to think--" said I.

     "I should do so," Sherlock Holmes remarked impatiently.

     I believe that I am one of the most long-suffering of mortals; but
     I'll admit that I was annoyed at the sardonic interruption.

     "Really, Holmes," said I severely, "you are a little trying at
     times."

     He was too much absorbed with his own thoughts to give any immediate
     answer to my remonstrance. He leaned upon his hand, with his untasted
     breakfast before him, and he stared at the slip of paper which he had
     just drawn from its envelope. Then he took the envelope itself, held
     it up to the light, and very carefully studied both the exterior and
     the flap.

     "It is Porlock's writing," said he thoughtfully. "I can hardly doubt
     that it is Porlock's writing, though I have seen it only twice
     before. The Greek e with the peculiar top flourish is distinctive.
     But if it is Porlock, then it must be something of the very first
     importance."

     He was speaking to himself rather than to me; but my vexation
     disappeared in the interest which the words awakened.

     "Who then is Porlock?" I asked.

     "Porlock, Watson, is a nom-de-plume, a mere identification mark; but
     behind it lies a shifty and evasive personality. In a former letter
     he frankly informed me that the name was not his own, and defied me
     ever to trace him among the teeming millions of this great city.
     Porlock is important, not for himself, but for the great man with
     whom he is in touch. Picture to yourself the pilot fish with the
     shark, the jackal with the lion--anything that is insignificant in
     companionship with what is formidable: not only formidable, Watson,
     but sinister--in the highest degree sinister. That is where he comes
     within my purview. You have heard me speak of Professor Moriarty?"

     "The famous scientific criminal, as famous among crooks as--"

     "My blushes, Watson!" Holmes murmured in a deprecating voice.

     "I was about to say, as he is unknown to the public."

     "A touch! A distinct touch!" cried Holmes. "You are developing a
     certain unexpected vein of pawky humour, Watson, against which I must
     learn to guard myself. But in calling Moriarty a criminal you are
     uttering libel in the eyes of the law--and there lie the glory and
     the wonder of it! The greatest schemer of all time, the organizer of
     every deviltry, the controlling brain of the underworld, a brain
     which might have made or marred the destiny of nations--that's the
     man! But so aloof is he from general suspicion, so immune from
     criticism, so admirable in his management and self-effacement, that
     for those very words that you have uttered he could hale you to a
     court and emerge with your year's pension as a solatium for his
     wounded character. Is he not the celebrated author of The Dynamics of
     an Asteroid, a book which ascends to such rarefied heights of pure
     mathematics that it is said that there was no man in the scientific
     press capable of criticizing it? Is this a man to traduce?
     Foul-mouthed doctor and slandered professor--such would be your
     respective roles! That's genius, Watson. But if I am spared by lesser
     men, our day will surely come."

     "May I be there to see!" I exclaimed devoutly. "But you were speaking
     of this man Porlock."

     "Ah, yes--the so-called Porlock is a link in the chain some little
     way from its great attachment. Porlock is not quite a sound
     link--between ourselves. He is the only flaw in that chain so far as
     I have been able to test it."

     "But no chain is stronger than its weakest link."

     "Exactly, my dear Watson! Hence the extreme importance of Porlock.
     Led on by some rudimentary aspirations towards right, and encouraged
     by the judicious stimulation of an occasional ten-pound note sent to
     him by devious methods, he has once or twice given me advance
     information which has been of value--that highest value which
     anticipates and prevents rather than avenges crime. I cannot doubt
     that, if we had the cipher, we should find that this communication is
     of the nature that I indicate."

     Again Holmes flattened out the paper upon his unused plate. I rose
     and, leaning over him, stared down at the curious inscription, which
     ran as follows:

                         534 C2 13 127 36 31 4 17 21 41
                         DOUGLAS 109 293 5 37 BIRLSTONE
                              26 BIRLSTONE 9 47 171

     "What do you make of it, Holmes?"

     "It is obviously an attempt to convey secret information."

     "But what is the use of a cipher message without the cipher?"

     "In this instance, none at all."

     "Why do you say 'in this instance'?"

     "Because there are many ciphers which I would read as easily as I do
     the apocrypha of the agony column: such crude devices amuse the
     intelligence without fatiguing it. But this is different. It is
     clearly a reference to the words in a page of some book. Until I am
     told which page and which book I am powerless."

     "But why 'Douglas' and 'Birlstone'?"

     "Clearly because those are words which were not contained in the page
     in question."

     "Then why has he not indicated the book?"

     "Your native shrewdness, my dear Watson, that innate cunning which is
     the delight of your friends, would surely prevent you from inclosing
     cipher and message in the same envelope. Should it miscarry, you are
     undone. As it is, both have to go wrong before any harm comes from
     it. Our second post is now overdue, and I shall be surprised if it
     does not bring us either a further letter of explanation, or, as is
     more probable, the very volume to which these figures refer."

     Holmes's calculation was fulfilled within a very few minutes by the
     appearance of Billy, the page, with the very letter which we were
     expecting.

     "The same writing," remarked Holmes, as he opened the envelope, "and
     actually signed," he added in an exultant voice as he unfolded the
     epistle. "Come, we are getting on, Watson." His brow clouded,
     however, as he glanced over the contents.

     "Dear me, this is very disappointing! I fear, Watson, that all our
     expectations come to nothing. I trust that the man Porlock will come
     to no harm.

     "Dear Mr. Holmes [he says]:
     "I will go no further in this matter. It is too dangerous--he
     suspects me. I can see that he suspects me. He came to me quite
     unexpectedly after I had actually addressed this envelope with the
     intention of sending you the key to the cipher. I was able to cover
     it up. If he had seen it, it would have gone hard with me. But I read
     suspicion in his eyes. Please burn the cipher message, which can now
     be of no use to you.
     "Fred Porlock."

     Holmes sat for some little time twisting this letter between his
     fingers, and frowning, as he stared into the fire.

     "After all," he said at last, "there may be nothing in it. It may be
     only his guilty conscience. Knowing himself to be a traitor, he may
     have read the accusation in the other's eyes."

     "The other being, I presume, Professor Moriarty."

     "No less! When any of that party talk about 'He' you know whom they
     mean. There is one predominant 'He' for all of them."

     "But what can he do?"

     "Hum! That's a large question. When you have one of the first brains
     of Europe up against you, and all the powers of darkness at his back,
     there are infinite possibilities. Anyhow, Friend Porlock is evidently
     scared out of his senses--kindly compare the writing in the note to
     that upon its envelope; which was done, he tells us, before this
     ill-omened visit. The one is clear and firm. The other hardly
     legible."

     "Why did he write at all? Why did he not simply drop it?"

     "Because he feared I would make some inquiry after him in that case,
     and possibly bring trouble on him."

     "No doubt," said I. "Of course." I had picked up the original cipher
     message and was bending my brows over it. "It's pretty maddening to
     think that an important secret may lie here on this slip of paper,
     and that it is beyond human power to penetrate it."

     Sherlock Holmes had pushed away his untasted breakfast and lit the
     unsavoury pipe which was the companion of his deepest meditations. "I
     wonder!" said he, leaning back and staring at the ceiling. "Perhaps
     there are points which have escaped your Machiavellian intellect. Let
     us consider the problem in the light of pure reason. This man's
     reference is to a book. That is our point of departure."

     "A somewhat vague one."

     "Let us see then if we can narrow it down. As I focus my mind upon
     it, it seems rather less impenetrable. What indications have we as to
     this book?"

     "None."

     "Well, well, it is surely not quite so bad as that. The cipher
     message begins with a large 534, does it not? We may take it as a
     working hypothesis that 534 is the particular page to which the
     cipher refers. So our book has already become a large book which is
     surely something gained. What other indications have we as to the
     nature of this large book? The next sign is C2. What do you make of
     that, Watson?"

     "Chapter the second, no doubt."

     "Hardly that, Watson. You will, I am sure, agree with me that if the
     page be given, the number of the chapter is immaterial. Also that if
     page 534 finds us only in the second chapter, the length of the first
     one must have been really intolerable."

     "Column!" I cried.

     "Brilliant, Watson. You are scintillating this morning. If it is not
     column, then I am very much deceived. So now, you see, we begin to
     visualize a large book printed in double columns which are each of a
     considerable length, since one of the words is numbered in the
     document as the two hundred and ninety-third. Have we reached the
     limits of what reason can supply?"

     "I fear that we have."

     "Surely you do yourself an injustice. One more coruscation, my dear
     Watson--yet another brain-wave! Had the volume been an unusual one,
     he would have sent it to me. Instead of that, he had intended, before
     his plans were nipped, to send me the clue in this envelope. He says
     so in his note. This would seem to indicate that the book is one
     which he thought I would have no difficulty in finding for myself. He
     had it--and he imagined that I would have it, too. In short, Watson,
     it is a very common book."

     "What you say certainly sounds plausible."

     "So we have contracted our field of search to a large book, printed
     in double columns and in common use."

     "The Bible!" I cried triumphantly.

     "Good, Watson, good! But not, if I may say so, quite good enough!
     Even if I accepted the compliment for myself I could hardly name any
     volume which would be less likely to lie at the elbow of one of
     Moriarty's associates. Besides, the editions of Holy Writ are so
     numerous that he could hardly suppose that two copies would have the
     same pagination. This is clearly a book which is standardized. He
     knows for certain that his page 534 will exactly agree with my page
     534."

     "But very few books would correspond with that."

     "Exactly. Therein lies our salvation. Our search is narrowed down to
     standardized books which anyone may be supposed to possess."

     "Bradshaw!"

     "There are difficulties, Watson. The vocabulary of Bradshaw is
     nervous and terse, but limited. The selection of words would hardly
     lend itself to the sending of general messages. We will eliminate
     Bradshaw. The dictionary is, I fear, inadmissible for the same
     reason. What then is left?"

     "An almanac!"

     "Excellent, Watson! I am very much mistaken if you have not touched
     the spot. An almanac! Let us consider the claims of Whitaker's
     Almanac. It is in common use. It has the requisite number of pages.
     It is in double column. Though reserved in its earlier vocabulary, it
     becomes, if I remember right, quite garrulous towards the end." He
     picked the volume from his desk. "Here is page 534, column two, a
     substantial block of print dealing, I perceive, with the trade and
     resources of British India. Jot down the words, Watson! Number
     thirteen is 'Mahratta.' Not, I fear, a very auspicious beginning.
     Number one hundred and twenty-seven is 'Government'; which at least
     makes sense, though somewhat irrelevant to ourselves and Professor
     Moriarty. Now let us try again. What does the Mahratta government do?
     Alas! the next word is 'pig's-bristles.' We are undone, my good
     Watson! It is finished!"

     He had spoken in jesting vein, but the twitching of his bushy
     eyebrows bespoke his disappointment and irritation. I sat helpless
     and unhappy, staring into the fire. A long silence was broken by a
     sudden exclamation from Holmes, who dashed at a cupboard, from which
     he emerged with a second yellow-covered volume in his hand.

     "We pay the price, Watson, for being too up-to-date!" he cried. "We
     are before our time, and suffer the usual penalties. Being the
     seventh of January, we have very properly laid in the new almanac. It
     is more than likely that Porlock took his message from the old one.
     No doubt he would have told us so had his letter of explanation been
     written. Now let us see what page 534 has in store for us. Number
     thirteen is 'There,' which is much more promising. Number one hundred
     and twenty-seven is 'is'--'There is'"--Holmes's eyes were gleaming
     with excitement, and his thin, nervous fingers twitched as he counted
     the words--"'danger.' Ha! Ha! Capital! Put that down, Watson. 'There
     is danger-- may-- come-- very-- soon-- one.' Then we have the name
     'Douglas' --'rich-- country-- now-- at-- Birlstone-- House--
     Birlstone-- confidence-- is-- pressing.' There, Watson! What do you
     think of pure reason and its fruit? If the greengrocer had such a
     thing as a laurel wreath, I should send Billy round for it."

     I was staring at the strange message which I had scrawled, as he
     deciphered it, upon a sheet of foolscap on my knee.

     "What a queer, scrambling way of expressing his meaning!" said I.

     "On the contrary, he has done quite remarkably well," said Holmes.
     "When you search a single column for words with which to express your
     meaning, you can hardly expect to get everything you want. You are
     bound to leave something to the intelligence of your correspondent.
     The purport is perfectly clear. Some deviltry is intended against one
     Douglas, whoever he may be, residing as stated, a rich country
     gentleman. He is sure--'confidence' was as near as he could get to
     'confident'--that it is pressing. There is our result--and a very
     workmanlike little bit of analysis it was!"

     Holmes had the impersonal joy of the true artist in his better work,
     even as he mourned darkly when it fell below the high level to which
     he aspired. He was still chuckling over his success when Billy swung
     open the door and Inspector MacDonald of Scotland Yard was ushered
     into the room.

     Those were the early days at the end of the '80's, when Alec
     MacDonald was far from having attained the national fame which he has
     now achieved. He was a young but trusted member of the detective
     force, who had distinguished himself in several cases which had been
     entrusted to him. His tall, bony figure gave promise of exceptional
     physical strength, while his great cranium and deep-set, lustrous
     eyes spoke no less clearly of the keen intelligence which twinkled
     out from behind his bushy eyebrows. He was a silent, precise man with
     a dour nature and a hard Aberdonian accent.

     Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain success,
     his own sole reward being the intellectual joy of the problem. For
     this reason the affection and respect of the Scotchman for his
     amateur colleague were profound, and he showed them by the frankness
     with which he consulted Holmes in every difficulty. Mediocrity knows
     nothing higher than itself; but talent instantly recognizes genius,
     and MacDonald had talent enough for his profession to enable him to
     perceive that there was no humiliation in seeking the assistance of
     one who already stood alone in Europe, both in his gifts and in his
     experience. Holmes was not prone to friendship, but he was tolerant
     of the big Scotchman, and smiled at the sight of him.

     "You are an early bird, Mr. Mac," said he. "I wish you luck with your
     worm. I fear this means that there is some mischief afoot."

     "If you said 'hope' instead of 'fear,' it would be nearer the truth,
     I'm thinking, Mr. Holmes," the inspector answered, with a knowing
     grin. "Well, maybe a wee nip would keep out the raw morning chill.
     No, I won't smoke, I thank you. I'll have to be pushing on my way;
     for the early hours of a case are the precious ones, as no man knows
     better than your own self. But--but--"

     The inspector had stopped suddenly, and was staring with a look of
     absolute amazement at a paper upon the table. It was the sheet upon
     which I had scrawled the enigmatic message.

     "Douglas!" he stammered. "Birlstone! What's this, Mr. Holmes? Man,
     it's witchcraft! Where in the name of all that is wonderful did you
     get those names?"

     "It is a cipher that Dr. Watson and I have had occasion to solve. But
     why--what's amiss with the names?"

     The inspector looked from one to the other of us in dazed
     astonishment. "Just this," said he, "that Mr. Douglas of Birlstone
     Manor House was horribly murdered last night!"





          CHAPTER II
          Sherlock Holmes Discourses


     It was one of those dramatic moments for which my friend existed. It
     would be an overstatement to say that he was shocked or even excited
     by the amazing announcement. Without having a tinge of cruelty in his
     singular composition, he was undoubtedly callous from long
     over-stimulation. Yet, if his emotions were dulled, his intellectual
     perceptions were exceedingly active. There was no trace then of the
     horror which I had myself felt at this curt declaration; but his face
     showed rather the quiet and interested composure of the chemist who
     sees the crystals falling into position from his oversaturated
     solution.

     "Remarkable!" said he. "Remarkable!"

     "You don't seem surprised."

     "Interested, Mr. Mac, but hardly surprised. Why should I be
     surprised? I receive an anonymous communication from a quarter which
     I know to be important, warning me that danger threatens a certain
     person. Within an hour I learn that this danger has actually
     materialized and that the person is dead. I am interested; but, as
     you observe, I am not surprised."

     In a few short sentences he explained to the inspector the facts
     about the letter and the cipher. MacDonald sat with his chin on his
     hands and his great sandy eyebrows bunched into a yellow tangle.

     "I was going down to Birlstone this morning," said he. "I had come to
     ask you if you cared to come with me--you and your friend here. But
     from what you say we might perhaps be doing better work in London."

     "I rather think not," said Holmes.

     "Hang it all, Mr. Holmes!" cried the inspector. "The papers will be
     full of the Birlstone mystery in a day or two; but where's the
     mystery if there is a man in London who prophesied the crime before
     ever it occurred? We have only to lay our hands on that man, and the
     rest will follow."

     "No doubt, Mr. Mac. But how do you propose to lay your hands on the
     so-called Porlock?"

     MacDonald turned over the letter which Holmes had handed him. "Posted
     in Camberwell--that doesn't help us much. Name, you say, is assumed.
     Not much to go on, certainly. Didn't you say that you have sent him
     money?"

     "Twice."

     "And how?"

     "In notes to Camberwell post-office."

     "Did you ever trouble to see who called for them?"

     "No."

     The inspector looked surprised and a little shocked. "Why not?"

     "Because I always keep faith. I had promised when he first wrote that
     I would not try to trace him."

     "You think there is someone behind him?"

     "I know there is."

     "This professor that I've heard you mention?"

     "Exactly!"

     Inspector MacDonald smiled, and his eyelid quivered as he glanced
     towards me. "I won't conceal from you, Mr. Holmes, that we think in
     the C. I. D. that you have a wee bit of a bee in your bonnet over
     this professor. I made some inquiries myself about the matter. He
     seems to be a very respectable, learned, and talented sort of man."

     "I'm glad you've got so far as to recognize the talent."

     "Man, you can't but recognize it! After I heard your view I made it
     my business to see him. I had a chat with him on eclipses. How the
     talk got that way I canna think; but he had out a reflector lantern
     and a globe, and made it all clear in a minute. He lent me a book;
     but I don't mind saying that it was a bit above my head, though I had
     a good Aberdeen upbringing. He'd have made a grand meenister with his
     thin face and gray hair and solemn-like way of talking. When he put
     his hand on my shoulder as we were parting, it was like a father's
     blessing before you go out into the cold, cruel world."

     Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. "Great!" he said. "Great! Tell
     me, Friend MacDonald, this pleasing and touching interview was, I
     suppose, in the professor's study?"

     "That's so."

     "A fine room, is it not?"

     "Very fine--very handsome indeed, Mr. Holmes."

     "You sat in front of his writing desk?"

     "Just so."

     "Sun in your eyes and his face in the shadow?"

     "Well, it was evening; but I mind that the lamp was turned on my
     face."

     "It would be. Did you happen to observe a picture over the
     professor's head?"

     "I don't miss much, Mr. Holmes. Maybe I learned that from you. Yes, I
     saw the picture--a young woman with her head on her hands, peeping at
     you sideways."

     "That painting was by Jean Baptiste Greuze."

     The inspector endeavoured to look interested.

     "Jean Baptiste Greuze," Holmes continued, joining his finger tips and
     leaning well back in his chair, "was a French artist who flourished
     between the years 1750 and 1800. I allude, of course to his working
     career. Modern criticism has more than indorsed the high opinion
     formed of him by his contemporaries."

     The inspector's eyes grew abstracted. "Hadn't we better--" he said.

     "We are doing so," Holmes interrupted. "All that I am saying has a
     very direct and vital bearing upon what you have called the Birlstone
     Mystery. In fact, it may in a sense be called the very centre of it."

     MacDonald smiled feebly, and looked appealingly to me. "Your thoughts
     move a bit too quick for me, Mr. Holmes. You leave out a link or two,
     and I can't get over the gap. What in the whole wide world can be the
     connection between this dead painting man and the affair at
     Birlstone?"

     "All knowledge comes useful to the detective," remarked Holmes. "Even
     the trivial fact that in the year 1865 a picture by Greuze entitled
     La Jeune Fille a l'Agneau fetched one million two hundred thousand
     francs--more than forty thousand pounds--at the Portalis sale may
     start a train of reflection in your mind."

     It was clear that it did. The inspector looked honestly interested.

     "I may remind you," Holmes continued, "that the professor's salary
     can be ascertained in several trustworthy books of reference. It is
     seven hundred a year."

     "Then how could he buy--"

     "Quite so! How could he?"

     "Ay, that's remarkable," said the inspector thoughtfully. "Talk away,
     Mr. Holmes. I'm just loving it. It's fine!"

     Holmes smiled. He was always warmed by genuine admiration--the
     characteristic of the real artist. "What about Birlstone?" he asked.

     "We've time yet," said the inspector, glancing at his watch. "I've a
     cab at the door, and it won't take us twenty minutes to Victoria. But
     about this picture: I thought you told me once, Mr. Holmes, that you
     had never met Professor Moriarty."

     "No, I never have."

     "Then how do you know about his rooms?"

     "Ah, that's another matter. I have been three times in his rooms,
     twice waiting for him under different pretexts and leaving before he
     came. Once--well, I can hardly tell about the once to an official
     detective. It was on the last occasion that I took the liberty of
     running over his papers--with the most unexpected results."

     "You found something compromising?"

     "Absolutely nothing. That was what amazed me. However, you have now
     seen the point of the picture. It shows him to be a very wealthy man.
     How did he acquire wealth? He is unmarried. His younger brother is a
     station master in the west of England. His chair is worth seven
     hundred a year. And he owns a Greuze."

     "Well?"

     "Surely the inference is plain."

     "You mean that he has a great income and that he must earn it in an
     illegal fashion?"

     "Exactly. Of course I have other reasons for thinking so--dozens of
     exiguous threads which lead vaguely up towards the centre of the web
     where the poisonous, motionless creature is lurking. I only mention
     the Greuze because it brings the matter within the range of your own
     observation."

     "Well, Mr. Holmes, I admit that what you say is interesting: it's
     more than interesting--it's just wonderful. But let us have it a
     little clearer if you can. Is it forgery, coining, burglary--where
     does the money come from?"

     "Have you ever read of Jonathan Wild?"

     "Well, the name has a familiar sound. Someone in a novel, was he not?
     I don't take much stock of detectives in novels--chaps that do things
     and never let you see how they do them. That's just inspiration: not
     business."

     "Jonathan Wild wasn't a detective, and he wasn't in a novel. He was a
     master criminal, and he lived last century--1750 or thereabouts."

     "Then he's no use to me. I'm a practical man."

     "Mr. Mac, the most practical thing that you ever did in your life
     would be to shut yourself up for three months and read twelve hours a
     day at the annals of crime. Everything comes in circles--even
     Professor Moriarty. Jonathan Wild was the hidden force of the London
     criminals, to whom he sold his brains and his organization on a
     fifteen per cent commission. The old wheel turns, and the same spoke
     comes up. It's all been done before, and will be again. I'll tell you
     one or two things about Moriarty which may interest you."

     "You'll interest me, right enough."

     "I happen to know who is the first link in his chain--a chain with
     this Napoleon-gone-wrong at one end, and a hundred broken fighting
     men, pickpockets, blackmailers, and card sharpers at the other, with
     every sort of crime in between. His chief of staff is Colonel
     Sebastian Moran, as aloof and guarded and inaccessible to the law as
     himself. What do you think he pays him?"

     "I'd like to hear."

     "Six thousand a year. That's paying for brains, you see--the American
     business principle. I learned that detail quite by chance. It's more
     than the Prime Minister gets. That gives you an idea of Moriarty's
     gains and of the scale on which he works. Another point: I made it my
     business to hunt down some of Moriarty's checks lately--just common
     innocent checks that he pays his household bills with. They were
     drawn on six different banks. Does that make any impression on your
     mind?"

     "Queer, certainly! But what do you gather from it?"

     "That he wanted no gossip about his wealth. No single man should know
     what he had. I have no doubt that he has twenty banking accounts; the
     bulk of his fortune abroad in the Deutsche Bank or the Credit
     Lyonnais as likely as not. Sometime when you have a year or two to
     spare I commend to you the study of Professor Moriarty."

     Inspector MacDonald had grown steadily more impressed as the
     conversation proceeded. He had lost himself in his interest. Now his
     practical Scotch intelligence brought him back with a snap to the
     matter in hand.

     "He can keep, anyhow," said he. "You've got us side-tracked with your
     interesting anecdotes, Mr. Holmes. What really counts is your remark
     that there is some connection between the professor and the crime.
     That you get from the warning received through the man Porlock. Can
     we for our present practical needs get any further than that?"

     "We may form some conception as to the motives of the crime. It is,
     as I gather from your original remarks, an inexplicable, or at least
     an unexplained, murder. Now, presuming that the source of the crime
     is as we suspect it to be, there might be two different motives. In
     the first place, I may tell you that Moriarty rules with a rod of
     iron over his people. His discipline is tremendous. There is only one
     punishment in his code. It is death. Now we might suppose that this
     murdered man--this Douglas whose approaching fate was known by one of
     the arch-criminal's subordinates--had in some way betrayed the chief.
     His punishment followed, and would be known to all--if only to put
     the fear of death into them."

     "Well, that is one suggestion, Mr. Holmes."

     "The other is that it has been engineered by Moriarty in the ordinary
     course of business. Was there any robbery?"

     "I have not heard."

     "If so, it would, of course, be against the first hypothesis and in
     favour of the second. Moriarty may have been engaged to engineer it
     on a promise of part spoils, or he may have been paid so much down to
     manage it. Either is possible. But whichever it may be, or if it is
     some third combination, it is down at Birlstone that we must seek the
     solution. I know our man too well to suppose that he has left
     anything up here which may lead us to him."

     "Then to Birlstone we must go!" cried MacDonald, jumping from his
     chair. "My word! it's later than I thought. I can give you,
     gentlemen, five minutes for preparation, and that is all."

     "And ample for us both," said Holmes, as he sprang up and hastened to
     change from his dressing gown to his coat. "While we are on our way,
     Mr. Mac, I will ask you to be good enough to tell me all about it."

     "All about it" proved to be disappointingly little, and yet there was
     enough to assure us that the case before us might well be worthy of
     the expert's closest attention. He brightened and rubbed his thin
     hands together as he listened to the meagre but remarkable details. A
     long series of sterile weeks lay behind us, and here at last there
     was a fitting object for those remarkable powers which, like all
     special gifts, become irksome to their owner when they are not in
     use. That razor brain blunted and rusted with inaction.

     Sherlock Holmes's eyes glistened, his pale cheeks took a warmer hue,
     and his whole eager face shone with an inward light when the call for
     work reached him. Leaning forward in the cab, he listened intently to
     MacDonald's short sketch of the problem which awaited us in Sussex.
     The inspector was himself dependent, as he explained to us, upon a
     scribbled account forwarded to him by the milk train in the early
     hours of the morning. White Mason, the local officer, was a personal
     friend, and hence MacDonald had been notified much more promptly than
     is usual at Scotland Yard when provincials need their assistance. It
     is a very cold scent upon which the Metropolitan expert is generally
     asked to run.

     "Dear Inspector MacDonald [said the letter which he read to us]:
     "Official requisition for your services is in separate envelope. This
     is for your private eye. Wire me what train in the morning you can
     get for Birlstone, and I will meet it--or have it met if I am too
     occupied. This case is a snorter. Don't waste a moment in getting
     started. If you can bring Mr. Holmes, please do so; for he will find
     something after his own heart. We would think the whole thing had
     been fixed up for theatrical effect if there wasn't a dead man in the
     middle of it. My word! it is a snorter."

      "Your friend seems to be no fool," remarked Holmes.

     "No, sir, White Mason is a very live man, if I am any judge."

     "Well, have you anything more?"

     "Only that he will give us every detail when we meet."

     "Then how did you get at Mr. Douglas and the fact that he had been
     horribly murdered?"

     "That was in the enclosed official report. It didn't say 'horrible':
     that's not a recognized official term. It gave the name John Douglas.
     It mentioned that his injuries had been in the head, from the
     discharge of a shotgun. It also mentioned the hour of the alarm,
     which was close on to midnight last night. It added that the case was
     undoubtedly one of murder, but that no arrest had been made, and that
     the case was one which presented some very perplexing and
     extraordinary features. That's absolutely all we have at present, Mr.
     Holmes."

     "Then, with your permission, we will leave it at that, Mr. Mac. The
     temptation to form premature theories upon insufficient data is the
     bane of our profession. I can see only two things for certain at
     present--a great brain in London, and a dead man in Sussex. It's the
     chain between that we are going to trace."





          CHAPTER III
          The Tragedy of Birlstone


     Now for a moment I will ask leave to remove my own insignificant
     personality and to describe events which occurred before we arrived
     upon the scene by the light of knowledge which came to us afterwards.
     Only in this way can I make the reader appreciate the people
     concerned and the strange setting in which their fate was cast.

     The village of Birlstone is a small and very ancient cluster of
     half-timbered cottages on the northern border of the county of
     Sussex. For centuries it had remained unchanged; but within the last
     few years its picturesque appearance and situation have attracted a
     number of well-to-do residents, whose villas peep out from the woods
     around. These woods are locally supposed to be the extreme fringe of
     the great Weald forest, which thins away until it reaches the
     northern chalk downs. A number of small shops have come into being to
     meet the wants of the increased population; so there seems some
     prospect that Birlstone may soon grow from an ancient village into a
     modern town. It is the centre for a considerable area of country,
     since Tunbridge Wells, the nearest place of importance, is ten or
     twelve miles to the eastward, over the borders of Kent.

     About half a mile from the town, standing in an old park famous for
     its huge beech trees, is the ancient Manor House of Birlstone. Part
     of this venerable building dates back to the time of the first
     crusade, when Hugo de Capus built a fortalice in the centre of the
     estate, which had been granted to him by the Red King. This was
     destroyed by fire in 1543, and some of its smoke-blackened corner
     stones were used when, in Jacobean times, a brick country house rose
     upon the ruins of the feudal castle.

     The Manor House, with its many gables and its small diamond-paned
     windows, was still much as the builder had left it in the early
     seventeenth century. Of the double moats which had guarded its more
     warlike predecessor, the outer had been allowed to dry up, and served
     the humble function of a kitchen garden. The inner one was still
     there, and lay forty feet in breadth, though now only a few feet in
     depth, round the whole house. A small stream fed it and continued
     beyond it, so that the sheet of water, though turbid, was never
     ditch-like or unhealthy. The ground floor windows were within a foot
     of the surface of the water.

     The only approach to the house was over a drawbridge, the chains and
     windlass of which had long been rusted and broken. The latest tenants
     of the Manor House had, however, with characteristic energy, set this
     right, and the drawbridge was not only capable of being raised, but
     actually was raised every evening and lowered every morning. By thus
     renewing the custom of the old feudal days the Manor House was
     converted into an island during the night--a fact which had a very
     direct bearing upon the mystery which was soon to engage the
     attention of all England.

     The house had been untenanted for some years and was threatening to
     moulder into a picturesque decay when the Douglases took possession
     of it. This family consisted of only two individuals--John Douglas
     and his wife. Douglas was a remarkable man, both in character and in
     person. In age he may have been about fifty, with a strong-jawed,
     rugged face, a grizzling moustache, peculiarly keen gray eyes, and a
     wiry, vigorous figure which had lost nothing of the strength and
     activity of youth. He was cheery and genial to all, but somewhat
     offhand in his manners, giving the impression that he had seen life
     in social strata on some far lower horizon than the county society of
     Sussex.

     Yet, though looked at with some curiosity and reserve by his more
     cultivated neighbours, he soon acquired a great popularity among the
     villagers, subscribing handsomely to all local objects, and attending
     their smoking concerts and other functions, where, having a
     remarkably rich tenor voice, he was always ready to oblige with an
     excellent song. He appeared to have plenty of money, which was said
     to have been gained in the California gold fields, and it was clear
     from his own talk and that of his wife that he had spent a part of
     his life in America.

     The good impression which had been produced by his generosity and by
     his democratic manners was increased by a reputation gained for utter
     indifference to danger. Though a wretched rider, he turned out at
     every meet, and took the most amazing falls in his determination to
     hold his own with the best. When the vicarage caught fire he
     distinguished himself also by the fearlessness with which he
     reentered the building to save property, after the local fire brigade
     had given it up as impossible. Thus it came about that John Douglas
     of the Manor House had within five years won himself quite a
     reputation in Birlstone.

     His wife, too, was popular with those who had made her acquaintance;
     though, after the English fashion, the callers upon a stranger who
     settled in the county without introductions were few and far between.
     This mattered the less to her, as she was retiring by disposition,
     and very much absorbed, to all appearance, in her husband and her
     domestic duties. It was known that she was an English lady who had
     met Mr. Douglas in London, he being at that time a widower. She was a
     beautiful woman, tall, dark, and slender, some twenty years younger
     than her husband, a disparity which seemed in no wise to mar the
     contentment of their family life.

     It was remarked sometimes, however, by those who knew them best, that
     the confidence between the two did not appear to be complete, since
     the wife was either very reticent about her husband's past life, or
     else, as seemed more likely, was imperfectly informed about it. It
     had also been noted and commented upon by a few observant people that
     there were signs sometimes of some nerve-strain upon the part of Mrs.
     Douglas, and that she would display acute uneasiness if her absent
     husband should ever be particularly late in his return. On a quiet
     countryside, where all gossip is welcome, this weakness of the lady
     of the Manor House did not pass without remark, and it bulked larger
     upon people's memory when the events arose which gave it a very
     special significance.

     There was yet another individual whose residence under that roof was,
     it is true, only an intermittent one, but whose presence at the time
     of the strange happenings which will now be narrated brought his name
     prominently before the public. This was Cecil James Barker, of Hales
     Lodge, Hampstead.

     Cecil Barker's tall, loose-jointed figure was a familiar one in the
     main street of Birlstone village; for he was a frequent and welcome
     visitor at the Manor House. He was the more noticed as being the only
     friend of the past unknown life of Mr. Douglas who was ever seen in
     his new English surroundings. Barker was himself an undoubted
     Englishman; but by his remarks it was clear that he had first known
     Douglas in America and had there lived on intimate terms with him. He
     appeared to be a man of considerable wealth, and was reputed to be a
     bachelor.

     In age he was rather younger than Douglas--forty-five at the most--a
     tall, straight, broad-chested fellow with a clean-shaved,
     prize-fighter face, thick, strong, black eyebrows, and a pair of
     masterful black eyes which might, even without the aid of his very
     capable hands, clear a way for him through a hostile crowd. He
     neither rode nor shot, but spent his days in wandering round the old
     village with his pipe in his mouth, or in driving with his host, or
     in his absence with his hostess, over the beautiful countryside. "An
     easy-going, free-handed gentleman," said Ames, the butler. "But, my
     word! I had rather not be the man that crossed him!" He was cordial
     and intimate with Douglas, and he was no less friendly with his
     wife--a friendship which more than once seemed to cause some
     irritation to the husband, so that even the servants were able to
     perceive his annoyance. Such was the third person who was one of the
     family when the catastrophe occurred.

     As to the other denizens of the old building, it will suffice out of
     a large household to mention the prim, respectable, and capable Ames,
     and Mrs. Allen, a buxom and cheerful person, who relieved the lady of
     some of her household cares. The other six servants in the house bear
     no relation to the events of the night of January 6th.

     It was at eleven forty-five that the first alarm reached the small
     local police station, in charge of Sergeant Wilson of the Sussex
     Constabulary. Cecil Barker, much excited, had rushed up to the door
     and pealed furiously upon the bell. A terrible tragedy had occurred
     at the Manor House, and John Douglas had been murdered. That was the
     breathless burden of his message. He had hurried back to the house,
     followed within a few minutes by the police sergeant, who arrived at
     the scene of the crime a little after twelve o'clock, after taking
     prompt steps to warn the county authorities that something serious
     was afoot.

     On reaching the Manor House, the sergeant had found the drawbridge
     down, the windows lighted up, and the whole household in a state of
     wild confusion and alarm. The white-faced servants were huddling
     together in the hall, with the frightened butler wringing his hands
     in the doorway. Only Cecil Barker seemed to be master of himself and
     his emotions; he had opened the door which was nearest to the
     entrance and he had beckoned to the sergeant to follow him. At that
     moment there arrived Dr. Wood, a brisk and capable general
     practitioner from the village. The three men entered the fatal room
     together, while the horror-stricken butler followed at their heels,
     closing the door behind him to shut out the terrible scene from the
     maid servants.

     The dead man lay on his back, sprawling with outstretched limbs in
     the centre of the room. He was clad only in a pink dressing gown,
     which covered his night clothes. There were carpet slippers on his
     bare feet. The doctor knelt beside him and held down the hand lamp
     which had stood on the table. One glance at the victim was enough to
     show the healer that his presence could be dispensed with. The man
     had been horribly injured. Lying across his chest was a curious
     weapon, a shotgun with the barrel sawed off a foot in front of the
     triggers. It was clear that this had been fired at close range and
     that he had received the whole charge in the face, blowing his head
     almost to pieces. The triggers had been wired together, so as to make
     the simultaneous discharge more destructive.

     The country policeman was unnerved and troubled by the tremendous
     responsibility which had come so suddenly upon him. "We will touch
     nothing until my superiors arrive," he said in a hushed voice,
     staring in horror at the dreadful head.

     "Nothing has been touched up to now," said Cecil Barker. "I'll answer
     for that. You see it all exactly as I found it."

     "When was that?" The sergeant had drawn out his notebook.

     "It was just half-past eleven. I had not begun to undress, and I was
     sitting by the fire in my bedroom when I heard the report. It was not
     very loud--it seemed to be muffled. I rushed down--I don't suppose it
     was thirty seconds before I was in the room."

     "Was the door open?"

     "Yes, it was open. Poor Douglas was lying as you see him. His bedroom
     candle was burning on the table. It was I who lit the lamp some
     minutes afterward."

     "Did you see no one?"

     "No. I heard Mrs. Douglas coming down the stair behind me, and I
     rushed out to prevent her from seeing this dreadful sight. Mrs.
     Allen, the housekeeper, came and took her away. Ames had arrived, and
     we ran back into the room once more."

     "But surely I have heard that the drawbridge is kept up all night."

     "Yes, it was up until I lowered it."

     "Then how could any murderer have got away? It is out of the
     question! Mr. Douglas must have shot himself."

     "That was our first idea. But see!" Barker drew aside the curtain,
     and showed that the long, diamond-paned window was open to its full
     extent. "And look at this!" He held the lamp down and illuminated a
     smudge of blood like the mark of a boot-sole upon the wooden sill.
     "Someone has stood there in getting out."

     "You mean that someone waded across the moat?"

     "Exactly!"

     "Then if you were in the room within half a minute of the crime, he
     must have been in the water at that very moment."

     "I have not a doubt of it. I wish to heaven that I had rushed to the
     window! But the curtain screened it, as you can see, and so it never
     occurred to me. Then I heard the step of Mrs. Douglas, and I could
     not let her enter the room. It would have been too horrible."

     "Horrible enough!" said the doctor, looking at the shattered head and
     the terrible marks which surrounded it. "I've never seen such
     injuries since the Birlstone railway smash."

     "But, I say," remarked the police sergeant, whose slow, bucolic
     common sense was still pondering the open window. "It's all very well
     your saying that a man escaped by wading this moat, but what I ask
     you is, how did he ever get into the house at all if the bridge was
     up?"

     "Ah, that's the question," said Barker.

     "At what o'clock was it raised?"

     "It was nearly six o'clock," said Ames, the butler.

     "I've heard," said the sergeant, "that it was usually raised at
     sunset. That would be nearer half-past four than six at this time of
     year."

     "Mrs. Douglas had visitors to tea," said Ames. "I couldn't raise it
     until they went. Then I wound it up myself."

     "Then it comes to this," said the sergeant: "If anyone came from
     outside--if they did--they must have got in across the bridge before
     six and been in hiding ever since, until Mr. Douglas came into the
     room after eleven."

     "That is so! Mr. Douglas went round the house every night the last
     thing before he turned in to see that the lights were right. That
     brought him in here. The man was waiting and shot him. Then he got
     away through the window and left his gun behind him. That's how I
     read it; for nothing else will fit the facts."

     The sergeant picked up a card which lay beside the dead man on the
     floor. The initials V. V. and under them the number 341 were rudely
     scrawled in ink upon it.

     "What's this?" he asked, holding it up.

     Barker looked at it with curiosity. "I never noticed it before," he
     said. "The murderer must have left it behind him."

     "V. V.--341. I can make no sense of that."

     The sergeant kept turning it over in his big fingers. "What's V. V.?
     Somebody's initials, maybe. What have you got there, Dr. Wood?"

     It was a good-sized hammer which had been lying on the rug in front
     of the fireplace--a substantial, workmanlike hammer. Cecil Barker
     pointed to a box of brass-headed nails upon the mantelpiece.

     "Mr. Douglas was altering the pictures yesterday," he said. "I saw
     him myself, standing upon that chair and fixing the big picture above
     it. That accounts for the hammer."

     "We'd best put it back on the rug where we found it," said the
     sergeant, scratching his puzzled head in his perplexity. "It will
     want the best brains in the force to get to the bottom of this thing.
     It will be a London job before it is finished." He raised the hand
     lamp and walked slowly round the room. "Hullo!" he cried, excitedly,
     drawing the window curtain to one side. "What o'clock were those
     curtains drawn?"

     "When the lamps were lit," said the butler. "It would be shortly
     after four."

     "Someone had been hiding here, sure enough." He held down the light,
     and the marks of muddy boots were very visible in the corner. "I'm
     bound to say this bears out your theory, Mr. Barker. It looks as if
     the man got into the house after four when the curtains were drawn
     and before six when the bridge was raised. He slipped into this room,
     because it was the first that he saw. There was no other place where
     he could hide, so he popped in behind this curtain. That all seems
     clear enough. It is likely that his main idea was to burgle the
     house; but Mr. Douglas chanced to come upon him, so he murdered him
     and escaped."

     "That's how I read it," said Barker. "But, I say, aren't we wasting
     precious time? Couldn't we start out and scour the country before the
     fellow gets away?"

     The sergeant considered for a moment.

     "There are no trains before six in the morning; so he can't get away
     by rail. If he goes by road with his legs all dripping, it's odds
     that someone will notice him. Anyhow, I can't leave here myself until
     I am relieved. But I think none of you should go until we see more
     clearly how we all stand."

     The doctor had taken the lamp and was narrowly scrutinizing the body.
     "What's this mark?" he asked. "Could this have any connection with
     the crime?"

     The dead man's right arm was thrust out from his dressing gown, and
     exposed as high as the elbow. About halfway up the forearm was a
     curious brown design, a triangle inside a circle, standing out in
     vivid relief upon the lard-coloured skin.

     "It's not tattooed," said the doctor, peering through his glasses. "I
     never saw anything like it. The man has been branded at some time as
     they brand cattle. What is the meaning of this?"

     "I don't profess to know the meaning of it," said Cecil Barker; "but
     I have seen the mark on Douglas many times this last ten years."

     "And so have I," said the butler. "Many a time when the master has
     rolled up his sleeves I have noticed that very mark. I've often
     wondered what it could be."

     "Then it has nothing to do with the crime, anyhow," said the
     sergeant. "But it's a rum thing all the same. Everything about this
     case is rum. Well, what is it now?"

     The butler had given an exclamation of astonishment and was pointing
     at the dead man's outstretched hand.

     "They've taken his wedding ring!" he gasped.

     "What!"

     "Yes, indeed. Master always wore his plain gold wedding ring on the
     little finger of his left hand. That ring with the rough nugget on it
     was above it, and the twisted snake ring on the third finger. There's
     the nugget and there's the snake, but the wedding ring is gone."

     "He's right," said Barker.

     "Do you tell me," said the sergeant, "that the wedding ring was below
     the other?"

     "Always!"

     "Then the murderer, or whoever it was, first took off this ring you
     call the nugget ring, then the wedding ring, and afterwards put the
     nugget ring back again."

     "That is so!"

     The worthy country policeman shook his head. "Seems to me the sooner
     we get London on to this case the better," said he. "White Mason is a
     smart man. No local job has ever been too much for White Mason. It
     won't be long now before he is here to help us. But I expect we'll
     have to look to London before we are through. Anyhow, I'm not ashamed
     to say that it is a deal too thick for the likes of me."





          CHAPTER IV
          Darkness


     At three in the morning the chief Sussex detective, obeying the
     urgent call from Sergeant Wilson of Birlstone, arrived from
     headquarters in a light dog-cart behind a breathless trotter. By the
     five-forty train in the morning he had sent his message to Scotland
     Yard, and he was at the Birlstone station at twelve o'clock to
     welcome us. White Mason was a quiet, comfortable-looking person in a
     loose tweed suit, with a clean-shaved, ruddy face, a stoutish body,
     and powerful bandy legs adorned with gaiters, looking like a small
     farmer, a retired gamekeeper, or anything upon earth except a very
     favourable specimen of the provincial criminal officer.

     "A real downright snorter, Mr. MacDonald!" he kept repeating. "We'll
     have the pressmen down like flies when they understand it. I'm hoping
     we will get our work done before they get poking their noses into it
     and messing up all the trails. There has been nothing like this that
     I can remember. There are some bits that will come home to you, Mr.
     Holmes, or I am mistaken. And you also, Dr. Watson; for the medicos
     will have a word to say before we finish. Your room is at the
     Westville Arms. There's no other place; but I hear that it is clean
     and good. The man will carry your bags. This way, gentlemen, if you
     please."

     He was a very bustling and genial person, this Sussex detective. In
     ten minutes we had all found our quarters. In ten more we were seated
     in the parlour of the inn and being treated to a rapid sketch of
     those events which have been outlined in the previous chapter.
     MacDonald made an occasional note, while Holmes sat absorbed, with
     the expression of surprised and reverent admiration with which the
     botanist surveys the rare and precious bloom.

     "Remarkable!" he said, when the story was unfolded, "most remarkable!
     I can hardly recall any case where the features have been more
     peculiar."

     "I thought you would say so, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason in great
     delight. "We're well up with the times in Sussex. I've told you now
     how matters were, up to the time when I took over from Sergeant
     Wilson between three and four this morning. My word! I made the old
     mare go! But I need not have been in such a hurry, as it turned out;
     for there was nothing immediate that I could do. Sergeant Wilson had
     all the facts. I checked them and considered them and maybe added a
     few of my own."

     "What were they?" asked Holmes eagerly.

     "Well, I first had the hammer examined. There was Dr. Wood there to
     help me. We found no signs of violence upon it. I was hoping that if
     Mr. Douglas defended himself with the hammer, he might have left his
     mark upon the murderer before he dropped it on the mat. But there was
     no stain."

     "That, of course, proves nothing at all," remarked Inspector
     MacDonald. "There has been many a hammer murder and no trace on the
     hammer."

     "Quite so. It doesn't prove it wasn't used. But there might have been
     stains, and that would have helped us. As a matter of fact there were
     none. Then I examined the gun. They were buckshot cartridges, and, as
     Sergeant Wilson pointed out, the triggers were wired together so
     that, if you pulled on the hinder one, both barrels were discharged.
     Whoever fixed that up had made up his mind that he was going to take
     no chances of missing his man. The sawed gun was not more than two
     foot long--one could carry it easily under one's coat. There was no
     complete maker's name; but the printed letters P-E-N were on the
     fluting between the barrels, and the rest of the name had been cut
     off by the saw."

     "A big P with a flourish above it, E and N smaller?" asked Holmes.

     "Exactly."

     "Pennsylvania Small Arms Company--well-known American firm," said
     Holmes.

     White Mason gazed at my friend as the little village practitioner
     looks at the Harley Street specialist who by a word can solve the
     difficulties that perplex him.

     "That is very helpful, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right. Wonderful!
     Wonderful! Do you carry the names of all the gun makers in the world
     in your memory?"

     Holmes dismissed the subject with a wave.

     "No doubt it is an American shotgun," White Mason continued. "I seem
     to have read that a sawed-off shotgun is a weapon used in some parts
     of America. Apart from the name upon the barrel, the idea had
     occurred to me. There is some evidence then, that this man who
     entered the house and killed its master was an American."

     MacDonald shook his head. "Man, you are surely travelling overfast,"
     said he. "I have heard no evidence yet that any stranger was ever in
     the house at all."

     "The open window, the blood on the sill, the queer card, the marks of
     boots in the corner, the gun!"

     "Nothing there that could not have been arranged. Mr. Douglas was an
     American, or had lived long in America. So had Mr. Barker. You don't
     need to import an American from outside in order to account for
     American doings."

     "Ames, the butler--"

     "What about him? Is he reliable?"

     "Ten years with Sir Charles Chandos--as solid as a rock. He has been
     with Douglas ever since he took the Manor House five years ago. He
     has never seen a gun of this sort in the house."

     "The gun was made to conceal. That's why the barrels were sawed. It
     would fit into any box. How could he swear there was no such gun in
     the house?"

     "Well, anyhow, he had never seen one."

     MacDonald shook his obstinate Scotch head. "I'm not convinced yet
     that there was ever anyone in the house," said he. "I'm asking you to
     conseedar" (his accent became more Aberdonian as he lost himself in
     his argument) "I'm asking you to conseedar what it involves if you
     suppose that this gun was ever brought into the house, and that all
     these strange things were done by a person from outside. Oh, man,
     it's just inconceivable! It's clean against common sense! I put it to
     you, Mr. Holmes, judging it by what we have heard."

     "Well, state your case, Mr. Mac," said Holmes in his most judicial
     style.

     "The man is not a burglar, supposing that he ever existed. The ring
     business and the card point to premeditated murder for some private
     reason. Very good. Here is a man who slips into a house with the
     deliberate intention of committing murder. He knows, if he knows
     anything, that he will have a deeficulty in making his escape, as the
     house is surrounded with water. What weapon would he choose? You
     would say the most silent in the world. Then he could hope when the
     deed was done to slip quickly from the window, to wade the moat, and
     to get away at his leisure. That's understandable. But is it
     understandable that he should go out of his way to bring with him the
     most noisy weapon he could select, knowing well that it will fetch
     every human being in the house to the spot as quick as they can run,
     and that it is all odds that he will be seen before he can get across
     the moat? Is that credible, Mr. Holmes?"

     "Well, you put the case strongly," my friend replied thoughtfully.
     "It certainly needs a good deal of justification. May I ask, Mr.
     White Mason, whether you examined the farther side of the moat at
     once to see if there were any signs of the man having climbed out
     from the water?"

     "There were no signs, Mr. Holmes. But it is a stone ledge, and one
     could hardly expect them."

     "No tracks or marks?"

     "None."

     "Ha! Would there be any objection, Mr. White Mason, to our going down
     to the house at once? There may possibly be some small point which
     might be suggestive."

     "I was going to propose it, Mr. Holmes; but I thought it well to put
     you in touch with all the facts before we go. I suppose if anything
     should strike you--" White Mason looked doubtfully at the amateur.

     "I have worked with Mr. Holmes before," said Inspector MacDonald. "He
     plays the game."

     "My own idea of the game, at any rate," said Holmes, with a smile. "I
     go into a case to help the ends of justice and the work of the
     police. If I have ever separated myself from the official force, it
     is because they have first separated themselves from me. I have no
     wish ever to score at their expense. At the same time, Mr. White
     Mason, I claim the right to work in my own way and give my results at
     my own time--complete rather than in stages."

     "I am sure we are honoured by your presence and to show you all we
     know," said White Mason cordially. "Come along, Dr. Watson, and when
     the time comes we'll all hope for a place in your book."

     We walked down the quaint village street with a row of pollarded elms
     on each side of it. Just beyond were two ancient stone pillars,
     weather-stained and lichen-blotched bearing upon their summits a
     shapeless something which had once been the rampant lion of Capus of
     Birlstone. A short walk along the winding drive with such sward and
     oaks around it as one only sees in rural England, then a sudden turn,
     and the long, low Jacobean house of dingy, liver-coloured brick lay
     before us, with an old-fashioned garden of cut yews on each side of
     it. As we approached it, there was the wooden drawbridge and the
     beautiful broad moat as still and luminous as quicksilver in the
     cold, winter sunshine.

     Three centuries had flowed past the old Manor House, centuries of
     births and of homecomings, of country dances and of the meetings of
     fox hunters. Strange that now in its old age this dark business
     should have cast its shadow upon the venerable walls! And yet those
     strange, peaked roofs and quaint, overhung gables were a fitting
     covering to grim and terrible intrigue. As I looked at the deep-set
     windows and the long sweep of the dull-coloured, water-lapped front,
     I felt that no more fitting scene could be set for such a tragedy.

     "That's the window," said White Mason, "that one on the immediate
     right of the drawbridge. It's open just as it was found last night."

     "It looks rather narrow for a man to pass."

     "Well, it wasn't a fat man, anyhow. We don't need your deductions,
     Mr. Holmes, to tell us that. But you or I could squeeze through all
     right."

     Holmes walked to the edge of the moat and looked across. Then he
     examined the stone ledge and the grass border beyond it.

     "I've had a good look, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason. "There is
     nothing there, no sign that anyone has landed--but why should he
     leave any sign?"

     "Exactly. Why should he? Is the water always turbid?"

     "Generally about this colour. The stream brings down the clay."

     "How deep is it?"

     "About two feet at each side and three in the middle."

     "So we can put aside all idea of the man having been drowned in
     crossing."

     "No, a child could not be drowned in it."

     We walked across the drawbridge, and were admitted by a quaint,
     gnarled, dried-up person, who was the butler, Ames. The poor old
     fellow was white and quivering from the shock. The village sergeant,
     a tall, formal, melancholy man, still held his vigil in the room of
     Fate. The doctor had departed.

     "Anything fresh, Sergeant Wilson?" asked White Mason.

     "No, sir."

     "Then you can go home. You've had enough. We can send for you if we
     want you. The butler had better wait outside. Tell him to warn Mr.
     Cecil Barker, Mrs. Douglas, and the housekeeper that we may want a
     word with them presently. Now, gentlemen, perhaps you will allow me
     to give you the views I have formed first, and then you will be able
     to arrive at your own."

     He impressed me, this country specialist. He had a solid grip of fact
     and a cool, clear, common-sense brain, which should take him some way
     in his profession. Holmes listened to him intently, with no sign of
     that impatience which the official exponent too often produced.

     "Is it suicide, or is it murder--that's our first question,
     gentlemen, is it not? If it were suicide, then we have to believe
     that this man began by taking off his wedding ring and concealing it;
     that he then came down here in his dressing gown, trampled mud into a
     corner behind the curtain in order to give the idea someone had
     waited for him, opened the window, put blood on the--"

     "We can surely dismiss that," said MacDonald.

     "So I think. Suicide is out of the question. Then a murder has been
     done. What we have to determine is, whether it was done by someone
     outside or inside the house."

     "Well, let's hear the argument."

     "There are considerable difficulties both ways, and yet one or the
     other it must be. We will suppose first that some person or persons
     inside the house did the crime. They got this man down here at a time
     when everything was still and yet no one was asleep. They then did
     the deed with the queerest and noisiest weapon in the world so as to
     tell everyone what had happened--a weapon that was never seen in the
     house before. That does not seem a very likely start, does it?"

     "No, it does not."

     "Well, then, everyone is agreed that after the alarm was given only a
     minute at the most had passed before the whole household--not Mr.
     Cecil Barker alone, though he claims to have been the first, but Ames
     and all of them were on the spot. Do you tell me that in that time
     the guilty person managed to make footmarks in the corner, open the
     window, mark the sill with blood, take the wedding ring off the dead
     man's finger, and all the rest of it? It's impossible!"

     "You put it very clearly," said Holmes. "I am inclined to agree with
     you."

     "Well, then, we are driven back to the theory that it was done by
     someone from outside. We are still faced with some big difficulties;
     but anyhow they have ceased to be impossibilities. The man got into
     the house between four-thirty and six; that is to say, between dusk
     and the time when the bridge was raised. There had been some
     visitors, and the door was open; so there was nothing to prevent him.
     He may have been a common burglar, or he may have had some private
     grudge against Mr. Douglas. Since Mr. Douglas has spent most of his
     life in America, and this shotgun seems to be an American weapon, it
     would seem that the private grudge is the more likely theory. He
     slipped into this room because it was the first he came to, and he
     hid behind the curtain. There he remained until past eleven at night.
     At that time Mr. Douglas entered the room. It was a short interview,
     if there were any interview at all; for Mrs. Douglas declares that
     her husband had not left her more than a few minutes when she heard
     the shot."

     "The candle shows that," said Holmes.

     "Exactly. The candle, which was a new one, is not burned more than
     half an inch. He must have placed it on the table before he was
     attacked; otherwise, of course, it would have fallen when he fell.
     This shows that he was not attacked the instant that he entered the
     room. When Mr. Barker arrived the candle was lit and the lamp was
     out."

     "That's all clear enough."

     "Well, now, we can reconstruct things on those lines. Mr. Douglas
     enters the room. He puts down the candle. A man appears from behind
     the curtain. He is armed with this gun. He demands the wedding
     ring--Heaven only knows why, but so it must have been. Mr. Douglas
     gave it up. Then either in cold blood or in the course of a
     struggle--Douglas may have gripped the hammer that was found upon the
     mat--he shot Douglas in this horrible way. He dropped his gun and
     also it would seem this queer card--V. V. 341, whatever that may
     mean--and he made his escape through the window and across the moat
     at the very moment when Cecil Barker was discovering the crime. How's
     that, Mr. Holmes?"

     "Very interesting, but just a little unconvincing."

     "Man, it would be absolute nonsense if it wasn't that anything else
     is even worse!" cried MacDonald. "Somebody killed the man, and
     whoever it was I could clearly prove to you that he should have done
     it some other way. What does he mean by allowing his retreat to be
     cut off like that? What does he mean by using a shotgun when silence
     was his one chance of escape? Come, Mr. Holmes, it's up to you to
     give us a lead, since you say Mr. White Mason's theory is
     unconvincing."

     Holmes had sat intently observant during this long discussion,
     missing no word that was said, with his keen eyes darting to right
     and to left, and his forehead wrinkled with speculation.

     "I should like a few more facts before I get so far as a theory, Mr.
     Mac," said he, kneeling down beside the body. "Dear me! these
     injuries are really appalling. Can we have the butler in for a
     moment? ... Ames, I understand that you have often seen this very
     unusual mark--a branded triangle inside a circle--upon Mr. Douglas's
     forearm?"

     "Frequently, sir."

     "You never heard any speculation as to what it meant?"

     "No, sir."

     "It must have caused great pain when it was inflicted. It is
     undoubtedly a burn. Now, I observe, Ames, that there is a small piece
     of plaster at the angle of Mr. Douglas's jaw. Did you observe that in
     life?"

     "Yes, sir, he cut himself in shaving yesterday morning."

     "Did you ever know him to cut himself in shaving before?"

     "Not for a very long time, sir."

     "Suggestive!" said Holmes. "It may, of course, be a mere coincidence,
     or it may point to some nervousness which would indicate that he had
     reason to apprehend danger. Had you noticed anything unusual in his
     conduct, yesterday, Ames?"

     "It struck me that he was a little restless and excited, sir."

     "Ha! The attack may not have been entirely unexpected. We do seem to
     make a little progress, do we not? Perhaps you would rather do the
     questioning, Mr. Mac?"

     "No, Mr. Holmes, it's in better hands than mine."

     "Well, then, we will pass to this card--V. V. 341. It is rough
     cardboard. Have you any of the sort in the house?"

     "I don't think so."

     Holmes walked across to the desk and dabbed a little ink from each
     bottle on to the blotting paper. "It was not printed in this room,"
     he said; "this is black ink and the other purplish. It was done by a
     thick pen, and these are fine. No, it was done elsewhere, I should
     say. Can you make anything of the inscription, Ames?"

     "No, sir, nothing."

     "What do you think, Mr. Mac?"

     "It gives me the impression of a secret society of some sort; the
     same with his badge upon the forearm."

     "That's my idea, too," said White Mason.

     "Well, we can adopt it as a working hypothesis and then see how far
     our difficulties disappear. An agent from such a society makes his
     way into the house, waits for Mr. Douglas, blows his head nearly off
     with this weapon, and escapes by wading the moat, after leaving a
     card beside the dead man, which will when mentioned in the papers,
     tell other members of the society that vengeance has been done. That
     all hangs together. But why this gun, of all weapons?"

     "Exactly."

     "And why the missing ring?"

     "Quite so."

     "And why no arrest? It's past two now. I take it for granted that
     since dawn every constable within forty miles has been looking out
     for a wet stranger?"

     "That is so, Mr. Holmes."

     "Well, unless he has a burrow close by or a change of clothes ready,
     they can hardly miss him. And yet they have missed him up to now!"
     Holmes had gone to the window and was examining with his lens the
     blood mark on the sill. "It is clearly the tread of a shoe. It is
     remarkably broad; a splay-foot, one would say. Curious, because, so
     far as one can trace any footmark in this mud-stained corner, one
     would say it was a more shapely sole. However, they are certainly
     very indistinct. What's this under the side table?"

     "Mr. Douglas's dumb-bells," said Ames.

     "Dumb-bell--there's only one. Where's the other?"

     "I don't know, Mr. Holmes. There may have been only one. I have not
     noticed them for months."

     "One dumb-bell--" Holmes said seriously; but his remarks were
     interrupted by a sharp knock at the door.

     A tall, sunburned, capable-looking, clean-shaved man looked in at us.
     I had no difficulty in guessing that it was the Cecil Barker of whom
     I had heard. His masterful eyes travelled quickly with a questioning
     glance from face to face.

     "Sorry to interrupt your consultation," said he, "but you should hear
     the latest news."

     "An arrest?"

     "No such luck. But they've found his bicycle. The fellow left his
     bicycle behind him. Come and have a look. It is within a hundred
     yards of the hall door."

     We found three or four grooms and idlers standing in the drive
     inspecting a bicycle which had been drawn out from a clump of
     evergreens in which it had been concealed. It was a well used
     Rudge-Whitworth, splashed as from a considerable journey. There was a
     saddlebag with spanner and oilcan, but no clue as to the owner.

     "It would be a grand help to the police," said the inspector, "if
     these things were numbered and registered. But we must be thankful
     for what we've got. If we can't find where he went to, at least we
     are likely to get where he came from. But what in the name of all
     that is wonderful made the fellow leave it behind? And how in the
     world has he got away without it? We don't seem to get a gleam of
     light in the case, Mr. Holmes."

     "Don't we?" my friend answered thoughtfully. "I wonder!"

          CHAPTER V
          The People Of the Drama

     "Have you seen all you want of the study?" asked White Mason as we
     reentered the house.

     "For the time," said the inspector, and Holmes nodded.

     "Then perhaps you would now like to hear the evidence of some of the
     people in the house. We could use the dining-room, Ames. Please come
     yourself first and tell us what you know."

     The butler's account was a simple and a clear one, and he gave a
     convincing impression of sincerity. He had been engaged five years
     before, when Douglas first came to Birlstone. He understood that Mr.
     Douglas was a rich gentleman who had made his money in America. He
     had been a kind and considerate employer--not quite what Ames was
     used to, perhaps; but one can't have everything. He never saw any
     signs of apprehension in Mr. Douglas: on the contrary, he was the
     most fearless man he had ever known. He ordered the drawbridge to be
     pulled up every night because it was the ancient custom of the old
     house, and he liked to keep the old ways up.

     Mr. Douglas seldom went to London or left the village; but on the day
     before the crime he had been shopping at Tunbridge Wells. He (Ames)
     had observed some restlessness and excitement on the part of Mr.
     Douglas that day; for he had seemed impatient and irritable, which
     was unusual with him. He had not gone to bed that night; but was in
     the pantry at the back of the house, putting away the silver, when he
     heard the bell ring violently. He heard no shot; but it was hardly
     possible he would, as the pantry and kitchens were at the very back
     of the house and there were several closed doors and a long passage
     between. The housekeeper had come out of her room, attracted by the
     violent ringing of the bell. They had gone to the front of the house
     together.

     As they reached the bottom of the stair he had seen Mrs. Douglas
     coming down it. No, she was not hurrying; it did not seem to him that
     she was particularly agitated. Just as she reached the bottom of the
     stair Mr. Barker had rushed out of the study. He had stopped Mrs.
     Douglas and begged her to go back.

     "For God's sake, go back to your room!" he cried. "Poor Jack is dead!
     You can do nothing. For God's sake, go back!"

     After some persuasion upon the stairs Mrs. Douglas had gone back. She
     did not scream. She made no outcry whatever. Mrs. Allen, the
     housekeeper, had taken her upstairs and stayed with her in the
     bedroom. Ames and Mr. Barker had then returned to the study, where
     they had found everything exactly as the police had seen it. The
     candle was not lit at that time; but the lamp was burning. They had
     looked out of the window; but the night was very dark and nothing
     could be seen or heard. They had then rushed out into the hall, where
     Ames had turned the windlass which lowered the drawbridge. Mr. Barker
     had then hurried off to get the police.

     Such, in its essentials, was the evidence of the butler.

     The account of Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, was, so far as it went, a
     corroboration of that of her fellow servant. The housekeeper's room
     was rather nearer to the front of the house than the pantry in which
     Ames had been working. She was preparing to go to bed when the loud
     ringing of the bell had attracted her attention. She was a little
     hard of hearing. Perhaps that was why she had not heard the shot; but
     in any case the study was a long way off. She remembered hearing some
     sound which she imagined to be the slamming of a door. That was a
     good deal earlier--half an hour at least before the ringing of the
     bell. When Mr. Ames ran to the front she went with him. She saw Mr.
     Barker, very pale and excited, come out of the study. He intercepted
     Mrs. Douglas, who was coming down the stairs. He entreated her to go
     back, and she answered him, but what she said could not be heard.

     "Take her up! Stay with her!" he had said to Mrs. Allen.

     She had therefore taken her to the bedroom, and endeavoured to soothe
     her. She was greatly excited, trembling all over, but made no other
     attempt to go downstairs. She just sat in her dressing gown by her
     bedroom fire, with her head sunk in her hands. Mrs. Allen stayed with
     her most of the night. As to the other servants, they had all gone to
     bed, and the alarm did not reach them until just before the police
     arrived. They slept at the extreme back of the house, and could not
     possibly have heard anything.

     So far the housekeeper could add nothing on cross-examination save
     lamentations and expressions of amazement.

     Cecil Barker succeeded Mrs. Allen as a witness. As to the occurrences
     of the night before, he had very little to add to what he had already
     told the police. Personally, he was convinced that the murderer had
     escaped by the window. The bloodstain was conclusive, in his opinion,
     on that point. Besides, as the bridge was up, there was no other
     possible way of escaping. He could not explain what had become of the
     assassin or why he had not taken his bicycle, if it were indeed his.
     He could not possibly have been drowned in the moat, which was at no
     place more than three feet deep.

     In his own mind he had a very definite theory about the murder.
     Douglas was a reticent man, and there were some chapters in his life
     of which he never spoke. He had emigrated to America when he was a
     very young man. He had prospered well, and Barker had first met him
     in California, where they had become partners in a successful mining
     claim at a place called Benito Canyon. They had done very well; but
     Douglas had suddenly sold out and started for England. He was a
     widower at that time. Barker had afterwards realized his money and
     come to live in London. Thus they had renewed their friendship.

     Douglas had given him the impression that some danger was hanging
     over his head, and he had always looked upon his sudden departure
     from California, and also his renting a house in so quiet a place in
     England, as being connected with this peril. He imagined that some
     secret society, some implacable organization, was on Douglas's track,
     which would never rest until it killed him. Some remarks of his had
     given him this idea; though he had never told him what the society
     was, nor how he had come to offend it. He could only suppose that the
     legend upon the placard had some reference to this secret society.

     "How long were you with Douglas in California?" asked Inspector
     MacDonald.

     "Five years altogether."

     "He was a bachelor, you say?"

     "A widower."

     "Have you ever heard where his first wife came from?"

     "No, I remember his saying that she was of German extraction, and I
     have seen her portrait. She was a very beautiful woman. She died of
     typhoid the year before I met him."

     "You don't associate his past with any particular part of America?"

     "I have heard him talk of Chicago. He knew that city well and had
     worked there. I have heard him talk of the coal and iron districts.
     He had travelled a good deal in his time."

     "Was he a politician? Had this secret society to do with politics?"

     "No, he cared nothing about politics."

     "You have no reason to think it was criminal?"

     "On the contrary, I never met a straighter man in my life."

     "Was there anything curious about his life in California?"

     "He liked best to stay and to work at our claim in the mountains. He
     would never go where other men were if he could help it. That's why I
     first thought that someone was after him. Then when he left so
     suddenly for Europe I made sure that it was so. I believe that he had
     a warning of some sort. Within a week of his leaving half a dozen men
     were inquiring for him."

     "What sort of men?"

     "Well, they were a mighty hard-looking crowd. They came up to the
     claim and wanted to know where he was. I told them that he was gone
     to Europe and that I did not know where to find him. They meant him
     no good--it was easy to see that."

     "Were these men Americans--Californians?"

     "Well, I don't know about Californians. They were Americans, all
     right. But they were not miners. I don't know what they were, and was
     very glad to see their backs."

     "That was six years ago?"

     "Nearer seven."

     "And then you were together five years in California, so that this
     business dates back not less than eleven years at the least?"

     "That is so."

     "It must be a very serious feud that would be kept up with such
     earnestness for as long as that. It would be no light thing that
     would give rise to it."

     "I think it shadowed his whole life. It was never quite out of his
     mind."

     "But if a man had a danger hanging over him, and knew what it was,
     don't you think he would turn to the police for protection?"

     "Maybe it was some danger that he could not be protected against.
     There's one thing you should know. He always went about armed. His
     revolver was never out of his pocket. But, by bad luck, he was in his
     dressing gown and had left it in the bedroom last night. Once the
     bridge was up, I guess he thought he was safe."

     "I should like these dates a little clearer," said MacDonald. "It is
     quite six years since Douglas left California. You followed him next
     year, did you not?"

     "That is so."

     "And he had been married five years. You must have returned about the
     time of his marriage."

     "About a month before. I was his best man."

     "Did you know Mrs. Douglas before her marriage?"

     "No, I did not. I had been away from England for ten years."

     "But you have seen a good deal of her since."

     Barker looked sternly at the detective. "I have seen a good deal of
     him since," he answered. "If I have seen her, it is because you
     cannot visit a man without knowing his wife. If you imagine there is
     any connection--"

     "I imagine nothing, Mr. Barker. I am bound to make every inquiry
     which can bear upon the case. But I mean no offense."

     "Some inquiries are offensive," Barker answered angrily.

     "It's only the facts that we want. It is in your interest and
     everyone's interest that they should be cleared up. Did Mr. Douglas
     entirely approve your friendship with his wife?"

     Barker grew paler, and his great, strong hands were clasped
     convulsively together. "You have no right to ask such questions!" he
     cried. "What has this to do with the matter you are investigating?"

     "I must repeat the question."

     "Well, I refuse to answer."

     "You can refuse to answer; but you must be aware that your refusal is
     in itself an answer, for you would not refuse if you had not
     something to conceal."

     Barker stood for a moment with his face set grimly and his strong
     black eyebrows drawn low in intense thought. Then he looked up with a
     smile. "Well, I guess you gentlemen are only doing your clear duty
     after all, and I have no right to stand in the way of it. I'd only
     ask you not to worry Mrs. Douglas over this matter; for she has
     enough upon her just now. I may tell you that poor Douglas had just
     one fault in the world, and that was his jealousy. He was fond of
     me--no man could be fonder of a friend. And he was devoted to his
     wife. He loved me to come here, and was forever sending for me. And
     yet if his wife and I talked together or there seemed any sympathy
     between us, a kind of wave of jealousy would pass over him, and he
     would be off the handle and saying the wildest things in a moment.
     More than once I've sworn off coming for that reason, and then he
     would write me such penitent, imploring letters that I just had to.
     But you can take it from me, gentlemen, if it was my last word, that
     no man ever had a more loving, faithful wife--and I can say also no
     friend could be more loyal than I!"

     It was spoken with fervour and feeling, and yet Inspector MacDonald
     could not dismiss the subject.

     "You are aware," said he, "that the dead man's wedding ring has been
     taken from his finger?"

     "So it appears," said Barker.

     "What do you mean by 'appears'? You know it as a fact."

     The man seemed confused and undecided. "When I said 'appears' I meant
     that it was conceivable that he had himself taken off the ring."

     "The mere fact that the ring should be absent, whoever may have
     removed it, would suggest to anyone's mind, would it not, that the
     marriage and the tragedy were connected?"

     Barker shrugged his broad shoulders. "I can't profess to say what it
     means." he answered. "But if you mean to hint that it could reflect
     in any way upon this lady's honour"--his eyes blazed for an instant,
     and then with an evident effort he got a grip upon his own
     emotions--"well, you are on the wrong track, that's all."

     "I don't know that I've anything else to ask you at present," said
     MacDonald, coldly.

     "There was one small point," remarked Sherlock Holmes. "When you
     entered the room there was only a candle lighted on the table, was
     there not?"

     "Yes, that was so."

     "By its light you saw that some terrible incident had occurred?"

     "Exactly."

     "You at once rang for help?"

     "Yes."

     "And it arrived very speedily?"

     "Within a minute or so."

     "And yet when they arrived they found that the candle was out and
     that the lamp had been lighted. That seems very remarkable."

     Again Barker showed some signs of indecision. "I don't see that it
     was remarkable, Mr. Holmes," he answered after a pause. "The candle
     threw a very bad light. My first thought was to get a better one. The
     lamp was on the table; so I lit it."

     "And blew out the candle?"

     "Exactly."

     Holmes asked no further question, and Barker, with a deliberate look
     from one to the other of us, which had, as it seemed to me, something
     of defiance in it, turned and left the room.

     Inspector MacDonald had sent up a note to the effect that he would
     wait upon Mrs. Douglas in her room; but she had replied that she
     would meet us in the dining room. She entered now, a tall and
     beautiful woman of thirty, reserved and self-possessed to a
     remarkable degree, very different from the tragic and distracted
     figure I had pictured. It is true that her face was pale and drawn,
     like that of one who has endured a great shock; but her manner was
     composed, and the finely moulded hand which she rested upon the edge
     of the table was as steady as my own. Her sad, appealing eyes
     travelled from one to the other of us with a curiously inquisitive
     expression. That questioning gaze transformed itself suddenly into
     abrupt speech.

     "Have you found anything out yet?" she asked.

     Was it my imagination that there was an undertone of fear rather than
     of hope in the question?

     "We have taken every possible step, Mrs. Douglas," said the
     inspector. "You may rest assured that nothing will be neglected."

     "Spare no money," she said in a dead, even tone. "It is my desire
     that every possible effort should be made."

     "Perhaps you can tell us something which may throw some light upon
     the matter."

     "I fear not; but all I know is at your service."

     "We have heard from Mr. Cecil Barker that you did not actually
     see--that you were never in the room where the tragedy occurred?"

     "No, he turned me back upon the stairs. He begged me to return to my
     room."

     "Quite so. You had heard the shot, and you had at once come down."

     "I put on my dressing gown and then came down."

     "How long was it after hearing the shot that you were stopped on the
     stair by Mr. Barker?"

     "It may have been a couple of minutes. It is so hard to reckon time
     at such a moment. He implored me not to go on. He assured me that I
     could do nothing. Then Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, led me upstairs
     again. It was all like some dreadful dream."

     "Can you give us any idea how long your husband had been downstairs
     before you heard the shot?"

     "No, I cannot say. He went from his dressing room, and I did not hear
     him go. He did the round of the house every night, for he was nervous
     of fire. It is the only thing that I have ever known him nervous of."

     "That is just the point which I want to come to, Mrs. Douglas. You
     have known your husband only in England, have you not?"

     "Yes, we have been married five years."

     "Have you heard him speak of anything which occurred in America and
     might bring some danger upon him?"

     Mrs. Douglas thought earnestly before she answered. "Yes." she said
     at last, "I have always felt that there was a danger hanging over
     him. He refused to discuss it with me. It was not from want of
     confidence in me--there was the most complete love and confidence
     between us--but it was out of his desire to keep all alarm away from
     me. He thought I should brood over it if I knew all, and so he was
     silent."

     "How did you know it, then?"

     Mrs. Douglas's face lit with a quick smile. "Can a husband ever carry
     about a secret all his life and a woman who loves him have no
     suspicion of it? I knew it by his refusal to talk about some episodes
     in his American life. I knew it by certain precautions he took. I
     knew it by certain words he let fall. I knew it by the way he looked
     at unexpected strangers. I was perfectly certain that he had some
     powerful enemies, that he believed they were on his track, and that
     he was always on his guard against them. I was so sure of it that for
     years I have been terrified if ever he came home later than was
     expected."

     "Might I ask," asked Holmes, "what the words were which attracted
     your attention?"

     "The Valley of Fear," the lady answered. "That was an expression he
     has used when I questioned him. 'I have been in the Valley of Fear. I
     am not out of it yet.'--'Are we never to get out of the Valley of
     Fear?' I have asked him when I have seen him more serious than usual.
     'Sometimes I think that we never shall,' he has answered."

     "Surely you asked him what he meant by the Valley of Fear?"

     "I did; but his face would become very grave and he would shake his
     head. 'It is bad enough that one of us should have been in its
     shadow,' he said. 'Please God it shall never fall upon you!' It was
     some real valley in which he had lived and in which something
     terrible had occurred to him, of that I am certain; but I can tell
     you no more."

     "And he never mentioned any names?"

     "Yes, he was delirious with fever once when he had his hunting
     accident three years ago. Then I remember that there was a name that
     came continually to his lips. He spoke it with anger and a sort of
     horror. McGinty was the name--Bodymaster McGinty. I asked him when he
     recovered who Bodymaster McGinty was, and whose body he was master
     of. 'Never of mine, thank God!' he answered with a laugh, and that
     was all I could get from him. But there is a connection between
     Bodymaster McGinty and the Valley of Fear."

     "There is one other point," said Inspector MacDonald. "You met Mr.
     Douglas in a boarding house in London, did you not, and became
     engaged to him there? Was there any romance, anything secret or
     mysterious, about the wedding?"

     "There was romance. There is always romance. There was nothing
     mysterious."

     "He had no rival?"

     "No, I was quite free."

     "You have heard, no doubt, that his wedding ring has been taken. Does
     that suggest anything to you? Suppose that some enemy of his old life
     had tracked him down and committed this crime, what possible reason
     could he have for taking his wedding ring?"

     For an instant I could have sworn that the faintest shadow of a smile
     flickered over the woman's lips.

     "I really cannot tell," she answered. "It is certainly a most
     extraordinary thing."

     "Well, we will not detain you any longer, and we are sorry to have
     put you to this trouble at such a time," said the inspector. "There
     are some other points, no doubt; but we can refer to you as they
     arise."

     She rose, and I was again conscious of that quick, questioning glance
     with which she had just surveyed us. "What impression has my evidence
     made upon you?" The question might as well have been spoken. Then,
     with a bow, she swept from the room.

     "She's a beautiful woman--a very beautiful woman," said MacDonald
     thoughtfully, after the door had closed behind her. "This man Barker
     has certainly been down here a good deal. He is a man who might be
     attractive to a woman. He admits that the dead man was jealous, and
     maybe he knew best himself what cause he had for jealousy. Then
     there's that wedding ring. You can't get past that. The man who tears
     a wedding ring off a dead man's--What do you say to it, Mr. Holmes?"

     My friend had sat with his head upon his hands, sunk in the deepest
     thought. Now he rose and rang the bell. "Ames," he said, when the
     butler entered, "where is Mr. Cecil Barker now?"

     "I'll see, sir."

     He came back in a moment to say that Barker was in the garden.

     "Can you remember, Ames, what Mr. Barker had on his feet last night
     when you joined him in the study?"

     "Yes, Mr. Holmes. He had a pair of bedroom slippers. I brought him
     his boots when he went for the police."

     "Where are the slippers now?"

     "They are still under the chair in the hall."

     "Very good, Ames. It is, of course, important for us to know which
     tracks may be Mr. Barker's and which from outside."

     "Yes, sir. I may say that I noticed that the slippers were stained
     with blood--so indeed were my own."

     "That is natural enough, considering the condition of the room. Very
     good, Ames. We will ring if we want you."

     A few minutes later we were in the study. Holmes had brought with him
     the carpet slippers from the hall. As Ames had observed, the soles of
     both were dark with blood.

     "Strange!" murmured Holmes, as he stood in the light of the window
     and examined them minutely. "Very strange indeed!"

     Stooping with one of his quick feline pounces, he placed the slipper
     upon the blood mark on the sill. It exactly corresponded. He smiled
     in silence at his colleagues.

     The inspector was transfigured with excitement. His native accent
     rattled like a stick upon railings.

     "Man," he cried, "there's not a doubt of it! Barker has just marked
     the window himself. It's a good deal broader than any bootmark. I
     mind that you said it was a splay-foot, and here's the explanation.
     But what's the game, Mr. Holmes--what's the game?"

     "Ay, what's the game?" my friend repeated thoughtfully.

     White Mason chuckled and rubbed his fat hands together in his
     professional satisfaction. "I said it was a snorter!" he cried. "And
     a real snorter it is!"

          CHAPTER VI
          A Dawning Light

     The three detectives had many matters of detail into which to
     inquire; so I returned alone to our modest quarters at the village
     inn. But before doing so I took a stroll in the curious old-world
     garden which flanked the house. Rows of very ancient yew trees cut
     into strange designs girded it round. Inside was a beautiful stretch
     of lawn with an old sundial in the middle, the whole effect so
     soothing and restful that it was welcome to my somewhat jangled
     nerves.

     In that deeply peaceful atmosphere one could forget, or remember only
     as some fantastic nightmare, that darkened study with the sprawling,
     bloodstained figure on the floor. And yet, as I strolled round it and
     tried to steep my soul in its gentle balm, a strange incident
     occurred, which brought me back to the tragedy and left a sinister
     impression in my mind.

     I have said that a decoration of yew trees circled the garden. At the
     end farthest from the house they thickened into a continuous hedge.
     On the other side of this hedge, concealed from the eyes of anyone
     approaching from the direction of the house, there was a stone seat.
     As I approached the spot I was aware of voices, some remark in the
     deep tones of a man, answered by a little ripple of feminine
     laughter.

     An instant later I had come round the end of the hedge and my eyes
     lit upon Mrs. Douglas and the man Barker before they were aware of my
     presence. Her appearance gave me a shock. In the dining-room she had
     been demure and discreet. Now all pretense of grief had passed away
     from her. Her eyes shone with the joy of living, and her face still
     quivered with amusement at some remark of her companion. He sat
     forward, his hands clasped and his forearms on his knees, with an
     answering smile upon his bold, handsome face. In an instant--but it
     was just one instant too late--they resumed their solemn masks as my
     figure came into view. A hurried word or two passed between them, and
     then Barker rose and came towards me.

     "Excuse me, sir," said he, "but am I addressing Dr. Watson?"

     I bowed with a coldness which showed, I dare say, very plainly the
     impression which had been produced upon my mind.

     "We thought that it was probably you, as your friendship with Mr.
     Sherlock Holmes is so well known. Would you mind coming over and
     speaking to Mrs. Douglas for one instant?"

     I followed him with a dour face. Very clearly I could see in my
     mind's eye that shattered figure on the floor. Here within a few
     hours of the tragedy were his wife and his nearest friend laughing
     together behind a bush in the garden which had been his. I greeted
     the lady with reserve. I had grieved with her grief in the
     dining-room. Now I met her appealing gaze with an unresponsive eye.

     "I fear that you think me callous and hard-hearted," said she.

     I shrugged my shoulders. "It is no business of mine," said I.

     "Perhaps some day you will do me justice. If you only realized--"

     "There is no need why Dr. Watson should realize," said Barker
     quickly. "As he has himself said, it is no possible business of his."

     "Exactly," said I, "and so I will beg leave to resume my walk."

     "One moment, Dr. Watson," cried the woman in a pleading voice. "There
     is one question which you can answer with more authority than anyone
     else in the world, and it may make a very great difference to me. You
     know Mr. Holmes and his relations with the police better than anyone
     else can. Supposing that a matter were brought confidentially to his
     knowledge, is it absolutely necessary that he should pass it on to
     the detectives?"

     "Yes, that's it," said Barker eagerly. "Is he on his own or is he
     entirely in with them?"

     "I really don't know that I should be justified in discussing such a
     point."

     "I beg--I implore that you will, Dr. Watson! I assure you that you
     will be helping us--helping me greatly if you will guide us on that
     point."

     There was such a ring of sincerity in the woman's voice that for the
     instant I forgot all about her levity and was moved only to do her
     will.

     "Mr. Holmes is an independent investigator," I said. "He is his own
     master, and would act as his own judgment directed. At the same time,
     he would naturally feel loyalty towards the officials who were
     working on the same case, and he would not conceal from them anything
     which would help them in bringing a criminal to justice. Beyond this
     I can say nothing, and I would refer you to Mr. Holmes himself if you
     wanted fuller information."

     So saying I raised my hat and went upon my way, leaving them still
     seated behind that concealing hedge. I looked back as I rounded the
     far end of it, and saw that they were still talking very earnestly
     together, and, as they were gazing after me, it was clear that it was
     our interview that was the subject of their debate.

     "I wish none of their confidences," said Holmes, when I reported to
     him what had occurred. He had spent the whole afternoon at the Manor
     House in consultation with his two colleagues, and returned about
     five with a ravenous appetite for a high tea which I had ordered for
     him. "No confidences, Watson; for they are mighty awkward if it comes
     to an arrest for conspiracy and murder."

     "You think it will come to that?"

     He was in his most cheerful and debonair humour. "My dear Watson,
     when I have exterminated that fourth egg I shall be ready to put you
     in touch with the whole situation. I don't say that we have fathomed
     it--far from it--but when we have traced the missing dumb-bell--"

     "The dumb-bell!"

     "Dear me, Watson, is it possible that you have not penetrated the
     fact that the case hangs upon the missing dumb-bell? Well, well, you
     need not be downcast; for between ourselves I don't think that either
     Inspector Mac or the excellent local practitioner has grasped the
     overwhelming importance of this incident. One dumb-bell, Watson!
     Consider an athlete with one dumb-bell! Picture to yourself the
     unilateral development, the imminent danger of a spinal curvature.
     Shocking, Watson, shocking!"

     He sat with his mouth full of toast and his eyes sparkling with
     mischief, watching my intellectual entanglement. The mere sight of
     his excellent appetite was an assurance of success, for I had very
     clear recollections of days and nights without a thought of food,
     when his baffled mind had chafed before some problem while his thin,
     eager features became more attenuated with the asceticism of complete
     mental concentration. Finally he lit his pipe, and sitting in the
     inglenook of the old village inn he talked slowly and at random about
     his case, rather as one who thinks aloud than as one who makes a
     considered statement.

     "A lie, Watson--a great, big, thumping, obtrusive, uncompromising
     lie--that's what meets us on the threshold! There is our starting
     point. The whole story told by Barker is a lie. But Barker's story is
     corroborated by Mrs. Douglas. Therefore she is lying also. They are
     both lying, and in a conspiracy. So now we have the clear problem.
     Why are they lying, and what is the truth which they are trying so
     hard to conceal? Let us try, Watson, you and I, if we can get behind
     the lie and reconstruct the truth.

     "How do I know that they are lying? Because it is a clumsy
     fabrication which simply could not be true. Consider! According to
     the story given to us, the assassin had less than a minute after the
     murder had been committed to take that ring, which was under another
     ring, from the dead man's finger, to replace the other ring--a thing
     which he would surely never have done--and to put that singular card
     beside his victim. I say that this was obviously impossible.

     "You may argue--but I have too much respect for your judgment,
     Watson, to think that you will do so--that the ring may have been
     taken before the man was killed. The fact that the candle had been
     lit only a short time shows that there had been no lengthy interview.
     Was Douglas, from what we hear of his fearless character, a man who
     would be likely to give up his wedding ring at such short notice, or
     could we conceive of his giving it up at all? No, no, Watson, the
     assassin was alone with the dead man for some time with the lamp lit.
     Of that I have no doubt at all.

     "But the gunshot was apparently the cause of death. Therefore the
     shot must have been fired some time earlier than we are told. But
     there could be no mistake about such a matter as that. We are in the
     presence, therefore, of a deliberate conspiracy upon the part of the
     two people who heard the gunshot--of the man Barker and of the woman
     Douglas. When on the top of this I am able to show that the blood
     mark on the windowsill was deliberately placed there by Barker, in
     order to give a false clue to the police, you will admit that the
     case grows dark against him.

     "Now we have to ask ourselves at what hour the murder actually did
     occur. Up to half-past ten the servants were moving about the house;
     so it was certainly not before that time. At a quarter to eleven they
     had all gone to their rooms with the exception of Ames, who was in
     the pantry. I have been trying some experiments after you left us
     this afternoon, and I find that no noise which MacDonald can make in
     the study can penetrate to me in the pantry when the doors are all
     shut.

     "It is otherwise, however, from the housekeeper's room. It is not so
     far down the corridor, and from it I could vaguely hear a voice when
     it was very loudly raised. The sound from a shotgun is to some extent
     muffled when the discharge is at very close range, as it undoubtedly
     was in this instance. It would not be very loud, and yet in the
     silence of the night it should have easily penetrated to Mrs. Allen's
     room. She is, as she has told us, somewhat deaf; but none the less
     she mentioned in her evidence that she did hear something like a door
     slamming half an hour before the alarm was given. Half an hour before
     the alarm was given would be a quarter to eleven. I have no doubt
     that what she heard was the report of the gun, and that this was the
     real instant of the murder.

     "If this is so, we have now to determine what Barker and Mrs.
     Douglas, presuming that they are not the actual murderers, could have
     been doing from quarter to eleven, when the sound of the shot brought
     them down, until quarter past eleven, when they rang the bell and
     summoned the servants. What were they doing, and why did they not
     instantly give the alarm? That is the question which faces us, and
     when it has been answered we shall surely have gone some way to solve
     our problem."

     "I am convinced myself," said I, "that there is an understanding
     between those two people. She must be a heartless creature to sit
     laughing at some jest within a few hours of her husband's murder."

     "Exactly. She does not shine as a wife even in her own account of
     what occurred. I am not a whole-souled admirer of womankind, as you
     are aware, Watson, but my experience of life has taught me that there
     are few wives, having any regard for their husbands, who would let
     any man's spoken word stand between them and that husband's dead
     body. Should I ever marry, Watson, I should hope to inspire my wife
     with some feeling which would prevent her from being walked off by a
     housekeeper when my corpse was lying within a few yards of her. It
     was badly stage-managed; for even the rawest investigators must be
     struck by the absence of the usual feminine ululation. If there had
     been nothing else, this incident alone would have suggested a
     prearranged conspiracy to my mind."

     "You think then, definitely, that Barker and Mrs. Douglas are guilty
     of the murder?"

     "There is an appalling directness about your questions, Watson," said
     Holmes, shaking his pipe at me. "They come at me like bullets. If you
     put it that Mrs. Douglas and Barker know the truth about the murder,
     and are conspiring to conceal it, then I can give you a whole-souled
     answer. I am sure they do. But your more deadly proposition is not so
     clear. Let us for a moment consider the difficulties which stand in
     the way.

     "We will suppose that this couple are united by the bonds of a guilty
     love, and that they have determined to get rid of the man who stands
     between them. It is a large supposition; for discreet inquiry among
     servants and others has failed to corroborate it in any way. On the
     contrary, there is a good deal of evidence that the Douglases were
     very attached to each other."

     "That, I am sure, cannot he true." said I, thinking of the beautiful
     smiling face in the garden.

     "Well at least they gave that impression. However, we will suppose
     that they are an extraordinarily astute couple, who deceive everyone
     upon this point, and conspire to murder the husband. He happens to be
     a man over whose head some danger hangs--"

     "We have only their word for that."

     Holmes looked thoughtful. "I see, Watson. You are sketching out a
     theory by which everything they say from the beginning is false.
     According to your idea, there was never any hidden menace, or secret
     society, or Valley of Fear, or Boss MacSomebody, or anything else.
     Well, that is a good sweeping generalization. Let us see what that
     brings us to. They invent this theory to account for the crime. They
     then play up to the idea by leaving this bicycle in the park as proof
     of the existence of some outsider. The stain on the windowsill
     conveys the same idea. So does the card on the body, which might have
     been prepared in the house. That all fits into your hypothesis,
     Watson. But now we come on the nasty, angular, uncompromising bits
     which won't slip into their places. Why a cut-off shotgun of all
     weapons--and an American one at that? How could they be so sure that
     the sound of it would not bring someone on to them? It's a mere
     chance as it is that Mrs. Allen did not start out to inquire for the
     slamming door. Why did your guilty couple do all this, Watson?"

     "I confess that I can't explain it."

     "Then again, if a woman and her lover conspire to murder a husband,
     are they going to advertise their guilt by ostentatiously removing
     his wedding ring after his death? Does that strike you as very
     probable, Watson?"

     "No, it does not."

     "And once again, if the thought of leaving a bicycle concealed
     outside had occurred to you, would it really have seemed worth doing
     when the dullest detective would naturally say this is an obvious
     blind, as the bicycle is the first thing which the fugitive needed in
     order to make his escape."

     "I can conceive of no explanation."

     "And yet there should be no combination of events for which the wit
     of man cannot conceive an explanation. Simply as a mental exercise,
     without any assertion that it is true, let me indicate a possible
     line of thought. It is, I admit, mere imagination; but how often is
     imagination the mother of truth?

     "We will suppose that there was a guilty secret, a really shameful
     secret in the life of this man Douglas. This leads to his murder by
     someone who is, we will suppose, an avenger, someone from outside.
     This avenger, for some reason which I confess I am still at a loss to
     explain, took the dead man's wedding ring. The vendetta might
     conceivably date back to the man's first marriage, and the ring be
     taken for some such reason.

     "Before this avenger got away, Barker and the wife had reached the
     room. The assassin convinced them that any attempt to arrest him
     would lead to the publication of some hideous scandal. They were
     converted to this idea, and preferred to let him go. For this purpose
     they probably lowered the bridge, which can be done quite
     noiselessly, and then raised it again. He made his escape, and for
     some reason thought that he could do so more safely on foot than on
     the bicycle. He therefore left his machine where it would not be
     discovered until he had got safely away. So far we are within the
     bounds of possibility, are we not?"

     "Well, it is possible, no doubt," said I, with some reserve.

     "We have to remember, Watson, that whatever occurred is certainly
     something very extraordinary. Well, now, to continue our
     supposititious case, the couple--not necessarily a guilty
     couple--realize after the murderer is gone that they have placed
     themselves in a position in which it may be difficult for them to
     prove that they did not themselves either do the deed or connive at
     it. They rapidly and rather clumsily met the situation. The mark was
     put by Barker's bloodstained slipper upon the window-sill to suggest
     how the fugitive got away. They obviously were the two who must have
     heard the sound of the gun; so they gave the alarm exactly as they
     would have done, but a good half hour after the event."

     "And how do you propose to prove all this?"

     "Well, if there were an outsider, he may be traced and taken. That
     would be the most effective of all proofs. But if not--well, the
     resources of science are far from being exhausted. I think that an
     evening alone in that study would help me much."

     "An evening alone!"

     "I propose to go up there presently. I have arranged it with the
     estimable Ames, who is by no means whole-hearted about Barker. I
     shall sit in that room and see if its atmosphere brings me
     inspiration. I'm a believer in the genius loci. You smile, Friend
     Watson. Well, we shall see. By the way, you have that big umbrella of
     yours, have you not?"

     "It is here."

     "Well, I'll borrow that if I may."

     "Certainly--but what a wretched weapon! If there is danger--"

     "Nothing serious, my dear Watson, or I should certainly ask for your
     assistance. But I'll take the umbrella. At present I am only awaiting
     the return of our colleagues from Tunbridge Wells, where they are at
     present engaged in trying for a likely owner to the bicycle."

     It was nightfall before Inspector MacDonald and White Mason came back
     from their expedition, and they arrived exultant, reporting a great
     advance in our investigation.

     "Man, I'll admeet that I had my doubts if there was ever an
     outsider," said MacDonald, "but that's all past now. We've had the
     bicycle identified, and we have a description of our man; so that's a
     long step on our journey."

     "It sounds to me like the beginning of the end," said Holmes. "I'm
     sure I congratulate you both with all my heart."

     "Well, I started from the fact that Mr. Douglas had seemed disturbed
     since the day before, when he had been at Tunbridge Wells. It was at
     Tunbridge Wells then that he had become conscious of some danger. It
     was clear, therefore, that if a man had come over with a bicycle it
     was from Tunbridge Wells that he might be expected to have come. We
     took the bicycle over with us and showed it at the hotels. It was
     identified at once by the manager of the Eagle Commercial as
     belonging to a man named Hargrave, who had taken a room there two
     days before. This bicycle and a small valise were his whole
     belongings. He had registered his name as coming from London, but had
     given no address. The valise was London made, and the contents were
     British; but the man himself was undoubtedly an American."

     "Well, well," said Holmes gleefully, "you have indeed done some solid
     work while I have been sitting spinning theories with my friend! It's
     a lesson in being practical, Mr. Mac."

     "Ay, it's just that, Mr. Holmes," said the inspector with
     satisfaction.

     "But this may all fit in with your theories," I remarked.

     "That may or may not be. But let us hear the end, Mr. Mac. Was there
     nothing to identify this man?"

     "So little that it was evident that he had carefully guarded himself
     against identification. There were no papers or letters, and no
     marking upon the clothes. A cycle map of the county lay on his
     bedroom table. He had left the hotel after breakfast yesterday
     morning on his bicycle, and no more was heard of him until our
     inquiries."

     "That's what puzzles me, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason. "If the
     fellow did not want the hue and cry raised over him, one would
     imagine that he would have returned and remained at the hotel as an
     inoffensive tourist. As it is, he must know that he will be reported
     to the police by the hotel manager and that his disappearance will be
     connected with the murder."

     "So one would imagine. Still, he has been justified of his wisdom up
     to date, at any rate, since he has not been taken. But his
     description--what of that?"

     MacDonald referred to his notebook. "Here we have it so far as they
     could give it. They don't seem to have taken any very particular
     stock of him; but still the porter, the clerk, and the chambermaid
     are all agreed that this about covers the points. He was a man about
     five foot nine in height, fifty or so years of age, his hair slightly
     grizzled, a grayish moustache, a curved nose, and a face which all of
     them described as fierce and forbidding."

     "Well, bar the expression, that might almost be a description of
     Douglas himself," said Holmes. "He is just over fifty, with grizzled
     hair and moustache, and about the same height. Did you get anything
     else?"

     "He was dressed in a heavy gray suit with a reefer jacket, and he
     wore a short yellow overcoat and a soft cap."

     "What about the shotgun?"

     "It is less than two feet long. It could very well have fitted into
     his valise. He could have carried it inside his overcoat without
     difficulty."

     "And how do you consider that all this bears upon the general case?"

     "Well, Mr. Holmes," said MacDonald, "when we have got our man--and
     you may be sure that I had his description on the wires within five
     minutes of hearing it--we shall be better able to judge. But, even as
     it stands, we have surely gone a long way. We know that an American
     calling himself Hargrave came to Tunbridge Wells two days ago with
     bicycle and valise. In the latter was a sawed-off shotgun; so he came
     with the deliberate purpose of crime. Yesterday morning he set off
     for this place on his bicycle, with his gun concealed in his
     overcoat. No one saw him arrive, so far as we can learn; but he need
     not pass through the village to reach the park gates, and there are
     many cyclists upon the road. Presumably he at once concealed his
     cycle among the laurels where it was found, and possibly lurked there
     himself, with his eye on the house, waiting for Mr. Douglas to come
     out. The shotgun is a strange weapon to use inside a house; but he
     had intended to use it outside, and there it has very obvious
     advantages, as it would be impossible to miss with it, and the sound
     of shots is so common in an English sporting neighbourhood that no
     particular notice would be taken."

     "That is all very clear," said Holmes.

     "Well, Mr. Douglas did not appear. What was he to do next? He left
     his bicycle and approached the house in the twilight. He found the
     bridge down and no one about. He took his chance, intending, no
     doubt, to make some excuse if he met anyone. He met no one. He
     slipped into the first room that he saw, and concealed himself behind
     the curtain. Thence he could see the drawbridge go up, and he knew
     that his only escape was through the moat. He waited until
     quarter-past eleven, when Mr. Douglas upon his usual nightly round
     came into the room. He shot him and escaped, as arranged. He was
     aware that the bicycle would be described by the hotel people and be
     a clue against him; so he left it there and made his way by some
     other means to London or to some safe hiding place which he had
     already arranged. How is that, Mr. Holmes?"

     "Well, Mr. Mac, it is very good and very clear so far as it goes.
     That is your end of the story. My end is that the crime was committed
     half an hour earlier than reported; that Mrs. Douglas and Barker are
     both in a conspiracy to conceal something; that they aided the
     murderer's escape--or at least that they reached the room before he
     escaped--and that they fabricated evidence of his escape through the
     window, whereas in all probability they had themselves let him go by
     lowering the bridge. That's my reading of the first half."

     The two detectives shook their heads.

     "Well, Mr. Holmes, if this is true, we only tumble out of one mystery
     into another," said the London inspector.

     "And in some ways a worse one," added White Mason. "The lady has
     never been in America in all her life. What possible connection could
     she have with an American assassin which would cause her to shelter
     him?"

     "I freely admit the difficulties," said Holmes. "I propose to make a
     little investigation of my own to-night, and it is just possible that
     it may contribute something to the common cause."

     "Can we help you, Mr. Holmes?"

     "No, no! Darkness and Dr. Watson's umbrella--my wants are simple. And
     Ames, the faithful Ames, no doubt he will stretch a point for me. All
     my lines of thought lead me back invariably to the one basic
     question--why should an athletic man develop his frame upon so
     unnatural an instrument as a single dumb-bell?"

     It was late that night when Holmes returned from his solitary
     excursion. We slept in a double-bedded room, which was the best that
     the little country inn could do for us. I was already asleep when I
     was partly awakened by his entrance.

     "Well, Holmes," I murmured, "have you found anything out?"

     He stood beside me in silence, his candle in his hand. Then the tall,
     lean figure inclined towards me. "I say, Watson," he whispered,
     "would you be afraid to sleep in the same room with a lunatic, a man
     with softening of the brain, an idiot whose mind has lost its grip?"

     "Not in the least," I answered in astonishment.

     "Ah, that's lucky," he said, and not another word would he utter that
     night.

          CHAPTER VII
          The Solution

     Next morning, after breakfast, we found Inspector MacDonald and White
     Mason seated in close consultation in the small parlour of the local
     police sergeant. On the table in front of them were piled a number of
     letters and telegrams, which they were carefully sorting and
     docketing. Three had been placed on one side.

     "Still on the track of the elusive bicyclist?" Holmes asked
     cheerfully. "What is the latest news of the ruffian?"

     MacDonald pointed ruefully to his heap of correspondence.

     "He is at present reported from Leicester, Nottingham, Southampton,
     Derby, East Ham, Richmond, and fourteen other places. In three of
     them--East Ham, Leicester, and Liverpool--there is a clear case
     against him, and he has actually been arrested. The country seems to
     be full of the fugitives with yellow coats."

     "Dear me!" said Holmes sympathetically. "Now, Mr. Mac and you, Mr.
     White Mason, I wish to give you a very earnest piece of advice. When
     I went into this case with you I bargained, as you will no doubt
     remember, that I should not present you with half-proved theories,
     but that I should retain and work out my own ideas until I had
     satisfied myself that they were correct. For this reason I am not at
     the present moment telling you all that is in my mind. On the other
     hand, I said that I would play the game fairly by you, and I do not
     think it is a fair game to allow you for one unnecessary moment to
     waste your energies upon a profitless task. Therefore I am here to
     advise you this morning, and my advice to you is summed up in three
     words--abandon the case."

     MacDonald and White Mason stared in amazement at their celebrated
     colleague.

     "You consider it hopeless!" cried the inspector.

     "I consider your case to be hopeless. I do not consider that it is
     hopeless to arrive at the truth."

     "But this cyclist. He is not an invention. We have his description,
     his valise, his bicycle. The fellow must be somewhere. Why should we
     not get him?"

     "Yes, yes, no doubt he is somewhere, and no doubt we shall get him;
     but I would not have you waste your energies in East Ham or
     Liverpool. I am sure that we can find some shorter cut to a result."

     "You are holding something back. It's hardly fair of you, Mr.
     Holmes." The inspector was annoyed.

     "You know my methods of work, Mr. Mac. But I will hold it back for
     the shortest time possible. I only wish to verify my details in one
     way, which can very readily be done, and then I make my bow and
     return to London, leaving my results entirely at your service. I owe
     you too much to act otherwise; for in all my experience I cannot
     recall any more singular and interesting study."

     "This is clean beyond me, Mr. Holmes. We saw you when we returned
     from Tunbridge Wells last night, and you were in general agreement
     with our results. What has happened since then to give you a
     completely new idea of the case?"

     "Well, since you ask me, I spent, as I told you that I would, some
     hours last night at the Manor House."

     "Well, what happened?"

     "Ah, I can only give you a very general answer to that for the
     moment. By the way, I have been reading a short but clear and
     interesting account of the old building, purchasable at the modest
     sum of one penny from the local tobacconist."

     Here Holmes drew a small tract, embellished with a rude engraving of
     the ancient Manor House, from his waistcoat pocket.

     "It immensely adds to the zest of an investigation, my dear Mr. Mac,
     when one is in conscious sympathy with the historical atmosphere of
     one's surroundings. Don't look so impatient; for I assure you that
     even so bald an account as this raises some sort of picture of the
     past in one's mind. Permit me to give you a sample. 'Erected in the
     fifth year of the reign of James I, and standing upon the site of a
     much older building, the Manor House of Birlstone presents one of the
     finest surviving examples of the moated Jacobean residence--' "

     "You are making fools of us, Mr. Holmes!"

     "Tut, tut, Mr. Mac!--the first sign of temper I have detected in you.
     Well, I won't read it verbatim, since you feel so strongly upon the
     subject. But when I tell you that there is some account of the taking
     of the place by a parliamentary colonel in 1644, of the concealment
     of Charles for several days in the course of the Civil War, and
     finally of a visit there by the second George, you will admit that
     there are various associations of interest connected with this
     ancient house."

     "I don't doubt it, Mr. Holmes; but that is no business of ours."

     "Is it not? Is it not? Breadth of view, my dear Mr. Mac, is one of
     the essentials of our profession. The interplay of ideas and the
     oblique uses of knowledge are often of extraordinary interest. You
     will excuse these remarks from one who, though a mere connoisseur of
     crime, is still rather older and perhaps more experienced than
     yourself."

     "I'm the first to admit that," said the detective heartily. "You get
     to your point, I admit; but you have such a deuced round-the-corner
     way of doing it."

     "Well, well, I'll drop past history and get down to present-day
     facts. I called last night, as I have already said, at the Manor
     House. I did not see either Barker or Mrs. Douglas. I saw no
     necessity to disturb them; but I was pleased to hear that the lady
     was not visibly pining and that she had partaken of an excellent
     dinner. My visit was specially made to the good Mr. Ames, with whom I
     exchanged some amiabilities, which culminated in his allowing me,
     without reference to anyone else, to sit alone for a time in the
     study."

     "What! With that?" I ejaculated.

     "No, no, everything is now in order. You gave permission for that,
     Mr. Mac, as I am informed. The room was in its normal state, and in
     it I passed an instructive quarter of an hour."

     "What were you doing?"

     "Well, not to make a mystery of so simple a matter, I was looking for
     the missing dumb-bell. It has always bulked rather large in my
     estimate of the case. I ended by finding it."

     "Where?"

     "Ah, there we come to the edge of the unexplored. Let me go a little
     further, a very little further, and I will promise that you shall
     share everything that I know."

     "Well, we're bound to take you on your own terms," said the
     inspector; "but when it comes to telling us to abandon the case--why
     in the name of goodness should we abandon the case?"

     "For the simple reason, my dear Mr. Mac, that you have not got the
     first idea what it is that you are investigating."

     "We are investigating the murder of Mr. John Douglas of Birlstone
     Manor."

     "Yes, yes, so you are. But don't trouble to trace the mysterious
     gentleman upon the bicycle. I assure you that it won't help you."

     "Then what do you suggest that we do?"

     "I will tell you exactly what to do, if you will do it."

     "Well, I'm bound to say I've always found you had reason behind all
     your queer ways. I'll do what you advise."

     "And you, Mr. White Mason?"

     The country detective looked helplessly from one to the other. Holmes
     and his methods were new to him. "Well, if it is good enough for the
     inspector, it is good enough for me," he said at last.

     "Capital!" said Holmes. "Well, then, I should recommend a nice,
     cheery country walk for both of you. They tell me that the views from
     Birlstone Ridge over the Weald are very remarkable. No doubt lunch
     could be got at some suitable hostelry; though my ignorance of the
     country prevents me from recommending one. In the evening, tired but
     happy--"

     "Man, this is getting past a joke!" cried MacDonald, rising angrily
     from his chair.

     "Well, well, spend the day as you like," said Holmes, patting him
     cheerfully upon the shoulder. "Do what you like and go where you
     will, but meet me here before dusk without fail--without fail, Mr.
     Mac."

     "That sounds more like sanity."

     "All of it was excellent advice; but I don't insist, so long as you
     are here when I need you. But now, before we part, I want you to
     write a note to Mr. Barker."

     "Well?"

     "I'll dictate it, if you like. Ready?

     "Dear Sir:
     "It has struck me that it is our duty to drain the moat, in the hope
     that we may find some--"

     "It's impossible," said the inspector. "I've made inquiry."

     "Tut, tut! My dear sir, please do what I ask you."

     "Well, go on."

     "--in the hope that we may find something which may bear upon our
     investigation. I have made arrangements, and the workmen will be at
     work early to-morrow morning diverting the stream--"

     "Impossible!"

     "--diverting the stream; so I thought it best to explain matters
     beforehand.

     "Now sign that, and send it by hand about four o'clock. At that hour
     we shall meet again in this room. Until then we may each do what we
     like; for I can assure you that this inquiry has come to a definite
     pause."

     Evening was drawing in when we reassembled. Holmes was very serious
     in his manner, myself curious, and the detectives obviously critical
     and annoyed.

     "Well, gentlemen," said my friend gravely, "I am asking you now to
     put everything to the test with me, and you will judge for yourselves
     whether the observations I have made justify the conclusions to which
     I have come. It is a chill evening, and I do not know how long our
     expedition may last; so I beg that you will wear your warmest coats.
     It is of the first importance that we should be in our places before
     it grows dark; so with your permission we shall get started at once."

     We passed along the outer bounds of the Manor House park until we
     came to a place where there was a gap in the rails which fenced it.
     Through this we slipped, and then in the gathering gloom we followed
     Holmes until we had reached a shrubbery which lies nearly opposite to
     the main door and the drawbridge. The latter had not been raised.
     Holmes crouched down behind the screen of laurels, and we all three
     followed his example.

     "Well, what are we to do now?" asked MacDonald with some gruffness.

     "Possess our souls in patience and make as little noise as possible,"
     Holmes answered.

     "What are we here for at all? I really think that you might treat us
     with more frankness."

     Holmes laughed. "Watson insists that I am the dramatist in real
     life," said he. "Some touch of the artist wells up within me, and
     calls insistently for a well-staged performance. Surely our
     profession, Mr. Mac, would be a drab and sordid one if we did not
     sometimes set the scene so as to glorify our results. The blunt
     accusation, the brutal tap upon the shoulder--what can one make of
     such a dnouement? But the quick inference, the subtle trap, the
     clever forecast of coming events, the triumphant vindication of bold
     theories--are these not the pride and the justification of our life's
     work? At the present moment you thrill with the glamour of the
     situation and the anticipation of the hunt. Where would be that
     thrill if I had been as definite as a timetable? I only ask a little
     patience, Mr. Mac, and all will be clear to you."

     "Well, I hope the pride and justification and the rest of it will
     come before we all get our death of cold," said the London detective
     with comic resignation.

     We all had good reason to join in the aspiration; for our vigil was a
     long and bitter one. Slowly the shadows darkened over the long,
     sombre face of the old house. A cold, damp reek from the moat chilled
     us to the bones and set our teeth chattering. There was a single lamp
     over the gateway and a steady globe of light in the fatal study.
     Everything else was dark and still.

     "How long is this to last?" asked the inspector finally. "And what is
     it we are watching for?"

     "I have no more notion than you how long it is to last," Holmes
     answered with some asperity. "If criminals would always schedule
     their movements like railway trains, it would certainly be more
     convenient for all of us. As to what it is we--Well, that's what we
     are watching for!"

     As he spoke the bright, yellow light in the study was obscured by
     somebody passing to and fro before it. The laurels among which we lay
     were immediately opposite the window and not more than a hundred feet
     from it. Presently it was thrown open with a whining of hinges, and
     we could dimly see the dark outline of a man's head and shoulders
     looking out into the gloom. For some minutes he peered forth in
     furtive, stealthy fashion, as one who wishes to be assured that he is
     unobserved. Then he leaned forward, and in the intense silence we
     were aware of the soft lapping of agitated water. He seemed to be
     stirring up the moat with something which he held in his hand. Then
     suddenly he hauled something in as a fisherman lands a fish--some
     large, round object which obscured the light as it was dragged
     through the open casement.

     "Now!" cried Holmes. "Now!"

     We were all upon our feet, staggering after him with our stiffened
     limbs, while he ran swiftly across the bridge and rang violently at
     the bell. There was the rasping of bolts from the other side, and the
     amazed Ames stood in the entrance. Holmes brushed him aside without a
     word and, followed by all of us, rushed into the room which had been
     occupied by the man whom we had been watching.

     The oil lamp on the table represented the glow which we had seen from
     outside. It was now in the hand of Cecil Barker, who held it towards
     us as we entered. Its light shone upon his strong, resolute,
     clean-shaved face and his menacing eyes.

     "What the devil is the meaning of all this?" he cried. "What are you
     after, anyhow?"

     Holmes took a swift glance round, and then pounced upon a sodden
     bundle tied together with cord which lay where it had been thrust
     under the writing table.

     "This is what we are after, Mr. Barker--this bundle, weighted with a
     dumb-bell, which you have just raised from the bottom of the moat."

     Barker stared at Holmes with amazement in his face. "How in thunder
     came you to know anything about it?" he asked.

     "Simply that I put it there."

     "You put it there! You!"

     "Perhaps I should have said 'replaced it there,'" said Holmes. "You
     will remember, Inspector MacDonald, that I was somewhat struck by the
     absence of a dumb-bell. I drew your attention to it; but with the
     pressure of other events you had hardly the time to give it the
     consideration which would have enabled you to draw deductions from
     it. When water is near and a weight is missing it is not a very
     far-fetched supposition that something has been sunk in the water.
     The idea was at least worth testing; so with the help of Ames, who
     admitted me to the room, and the crook of Dr. Watson's umbrella, I
     was able last night to fish up and inspect this bundle.

     "It was of the first importance, however, that we should be able to
     prove who placed it there. This we accomplished by the very obvious
     device of announcing that the moat would be dried to-morrow, which
     had, of course, the effect that whoever had hidden the bundle would
     most certainly withdraw it the moment that darkness enabled him to do
     so. We have no less than four witnesses as to who it was who took
     advantage of the opportunity, and so, Mr. Barker, I think the word
     lies now with you."

     Sherlock Holmes put the sopping bundle upon the table beside the lamp
     and undid the cord which bound it. From within he extracted a
     dumb-bell, which he tossed down to its fellow in the corner. Next he
     drew forth a pair of boots. "American, as you perceive," he remarked,
     pointing to the toes. Then he laid upon the table a long, deadly,
     sheathed knife. Finally he unravelled a bundle of clothing,
     comprising a complete set of underclothes, socks, a gray tweed suit,
     and a short yellow overcoat.

     "The clothes are commonplace," remarked Holmes, "save only the
     overcoat, which is full of suggestive touches." He held it tenderly
     towards the light. "Here, as you perceive, is the inner pocket
     prolonged into the lining in such fashion as to give ample space for
     the truncated fowling piece. The tailor's tab is on the neck--'Neal,
     Outfitter, Vermissa, U. S. A.' I have spent an instructive afternoon
     in the rector's library, and have enlarged my knowledge by adding the
     fact that Vermissa is a flourishing little town at the head of one of
     the best known coal and iron valleys in the United States. I have
     some recollection, Mr. Barker, that you associated the coal districts
     with Mr. Douglas's first wife, and it would surely not be too
     far-fetched an inference that the V. V. upon the card by the dead
     body might stand for Vermissa Valley, or that this very valley which
     sends forth emissaries of murder may be that Valley of Fear of which
     we have heard. So much is fairly clear. And now, Mr. Barker, I seem
     to be standing rather in the way of your explanation."

     It was a sight to see Cecil Barker's expressive face during this
     exposition of the great detective. Anger, amazement, consternation,
     and indecision swept over it in turn. Finally he took refuge in a
     somewhat acrid irony.

     "You know such a lot, Mr. Holmes, perhaps you had better tell us some
     more," he sneered.

     "I have no doubt that I could tell you a great deal more, Mr. Barker;
     but it would come with a better grace from you."

     "Oh, you think so, do you? Well, all I can say is that if there's any
     secret here it is not my secret, and I am not the man to give it
     away."

     "Well, if you take that line, Mr. Barker," said the inspector
     quietly, "we must just keep you in sight until we have the warrant
     and can hold you."

     "You can do what you damn please about that," said Barker defiantly.

     The proceedings seemed to have come to a definite end so far as he
     was concerned; for one had only to look at that granite face to
     realize that no peine forte et dure would ever force him to plead
     against his will. The deadlock was broken, however, by a woman's
     voice. Mrs. Douglas had been standing listening at the half opened
     door, and now she entered the room.

     "You have done enough for now, Cecil," said she. "Whatever comes of
     it in the future, you have done enough."

     "Enough and more than enough," remarked Sherlock Holmes gravely. "I
     have every sympathy with you, madam, and should strongly urge you to
     have some confidence in the common sense of our jurisdiction and to
     take the police voluntarily into your complete confidence. It may be
     that I am myself at fault for not following up the hint which you
     conveyed to me through my friend, Dr. Watson; but, at that time I had
     every reason to believe that you were directly concerned in the
     crime. Now I am assured that this is not so. At the same time, there
     is much that is unexplained, and I should strongly recommend that you
     ask Mr. Douglas to tell us his own story."

     Mrs. Douglas gave a cry of astonishment at Holmes's words. The
     detectives and I must have echoed it, when we were aware of a man who
     seemed to have emerged from the wall, who advanced now from the gloom
     of the corner in which he had appeared. Mrs. Douglas turned, and in
     an instant her arms were round him. Barker had seized his
     outstretched hand.

     "It's best this way, Jack," his wife repeated; "I am sure that it is
     best."

     "Indeed, yes, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes, "I am sure that you
     will find it best."

     The man stood blinking at us with the dazed look of one who comes
     from the dark into the light. It was a remarkable face, bold gray
     eyes, a strong, short-clipped, grizzled moustache, a square,
     projecting chin, and a humorous mouth. He took a good look at us all,
     and then to my amazement he advanced to me and handed me a bundle of
     paper.

     "I've heard of you," said he in a voice which was not quite English
     and not quite American, but was altogether mellow and pleasing. "You
     are the historian of this bunch. Well, Dr. Watson, you've never had
     such a story as that pass through your hands before, and I'll lay my
     last dollar on that. Tell it your own way; but there are the facts,
     and you can't miss the public so long as you have those. I've been
     cooped up two days, and I've spent the daylight hours--as much
     daylight as I could get in that rat trap--in putting the thing into
     words. You're welcome to them--you and your public. There's the story
     of the Valley of Fear."

     "That's the past, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes quietly. "What
     we desire now is to hear your story of the present."

     "You'll have it, sir," said Douglas. "May I smoke as I talk? Well,
     thank you, Mr. Holmes. You're a smoker yourself, if I remember right,
     and you'll guess what it is to be sitting for two days with tobacco
     in your pocket and afraid that the smell will give you away." He
     leaned against the mantelpiece and sucked at the cigar which Holmes
     had handed him. "I've heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I never guessed that
     I should meet you. But before you are through with that," he nodded
     at my papers, "you will say I've brought you something fresh."

     Inspector MacDonald had been staring at the newcomer with the
     greatest amazement. "Well, this fairly beats me!" he cried at last.
     "If you are Mr. John Douglas of Birlstone Manor, then whose death
     have we been investigating for these two days, and where in the world
     have you sprung from now? You seemed to me to come out of the floor
     like a jack-in-a-box."

     "Ah, Mr. Mac," said Holmes, shaking a reproving forefinger, "you
     would not read that excellent local compilation which described the
     concealment of King Charles. People did not hide in those days
     without excellent hiding places, and the hiding place that has once
     been used may be again. I had persuaded myself that we should find
     Mr. Douglas under this roof."

     "And how long have you been playing this trick upon us, Mr. Holmes?"
     said the inspector angrily. "How long have you allowed us to waste
     ourselves upon a search that you knew to be an absurd one?"

     "Not one instant, my dear Mr. Mac. Only last night did I form my
     views of the case. As they could not be put to the proof until this
     evening, I invited you and your colleague to take a holiday for the
     day. Pray what more could I do? When I found the suit of clothes in
     the moat, it at once became apparent to me that the body we had found
     could not have been the body of Mr. John Douglas at all, but must be
     that of the bicyclist from Tunbridge Wells. No other conclusion was
     possible. Therefore I had to determine where Mr. John Douglas himself
     could be, and the balance of probability was that with the connivance
     of his wife and his friend he was concealed in a house which had such
     conveniences for a fugitive, and awaiting quieter times when he could
     make his final escape."

     "Well, you figured it out about right," said Douglas approvingly. "I
     thought I'd dodge your British law; for I was not sure how I stood
     under it, and also I saw my chance to throw these hounds once for all
     off my track. Mind you, from first to last I have done nothing to be
     ashamed of, and nothing that I would not do again; but you'll judge
     that for yourselves when I tell you my story. Never mind warning me,
     Inspector: I'm ready to stand pat upon the truth.

     "I'm not going to begin at the beginning. That's all there," he
     indicated my bundle of papers, "and a mighty queer yarn you'll find
     it. It all comes down to this: That there are some men that have good
     cause to hate me and would give their last dollar to know that they
     had got me. So long as I am alive and they are alive, there is no
     safety in this world for me. They hunted me from Chicago to
     California, then they chased me out of America; but when I married
     and settled down in this quiet spot I thought my last years were
     going to be peaceable.

     "I never explained to my wife how things were. Why should I pull her
     into it? She would never have a quiet moment again; but would always
     be imagining trouble. I fancy she knew something, for I may have
     dropped a word here or a word there; but until yesterday, after you
     gentlemen had seen her, she never knew the rights of the matter. She
     told you all she knew, and so did Barker here; for on the night when
     this thing happened there was mighty little time for explanations.
     She knows everything now, and I would have been a wiser man if I had
     told her sooner. But it was a hard question, dear," he took her hand
     for an instant in his own, "and I acted for the best.

     "Well, gentlemen, the day before these happenings I was over in
     Tunbridge Wells, and I got a glimpse of a man in the street. It was
     only a glimpse; but I have a quick eye for these things, and I never
     doubted who it was. It was the worst enemy I had among them all--one
     who has been after me like a hungry wolf after a caribou all these
     years. I knew there was trouble coming, and I came home and made
     ready for it. I guessed I'd fight through it all right on my own, my
     luck was a proverb in the States about '76. I never doubted that it
     would be with me still.

     "I was on my guard all that next day, and never went out into the
     park. It's as well, or he'd have had the drop on me with that
     buckshot gun of his before ever I could draw on him. After the bridge
     was up--my mind was always more restful when that bridge was up in
     the evenings--I put the thing clear out of my head. I never dreamed
     of his getting into the house and waiting for me. But when I made my
     round in my dressing gown, as was my habit, I had no sooner entered
     the study than I scented danger. I guess when a man has had dangers
     in his life--and I've had more than most in my time--there is a kind
     of sixth sense that waves the red flag. I saw the signal clear
     enough, and yet I couldn't tell you why. Next instant I spotted a
     boot under the window curtain, and then I saw why plain enough.

     "I'd just the one candle that was in my hand; but there was a good
     light from the hall lamp through the open door. I put down the candle
     and jumped for a hammer that I'd left on the mantel. At the same
     moment he sprang at me. I saw the glint of a knife, and I lashed at
     him with the hammer. I got him somewhere; for the knife tinkled down
     on the floor. He dodged round the table as quick as an eel, and a
     moment later he'd got his gun from under his coat. I heard him cock
     it; but I had got hold of it before he could fire. I had it by the
     barrel, and we wrestled for it all ends up for a minute or more. It
     was death to the man that lost his grip.

     "He never lost his grip; but he got it butt downward for a moment too
     long. Maybe it was I that pulled the trigger. Maybe we just jolted it
     off between us. Anyhow, he got both barrels in the face, and there I
     was, staring down at all that was left of Ted Baldwin. I'd recognized
     him in the township, and again when he sprang for me; but his own
     mother wouldn't recognize him as I saw him then. I'm used to rough
     work; but I fairly turned sick at the sight of him.

     "I was hanging on the side of the table when Barker came hurrying
     down. I heard my wife coming, and I ran to the door and stopped her.
     It was no sight for a woman. I promised I'd come to her soon. I said
     a word or two to Barker--he took it all in at a glance--and we waited
     for the rest to come along. But there was no sign of them. Then we
     understood that they could hear nothing, and that all that had
     happened was known only to ourselves.

     "It was at that instant that the idea came to me. I was fairly
     dazzled by the brilliance of it. The man's sleeve had slipped up and
     there was the branded mark of the lodge upon his forearm. See here!"

     The man whom we had known as Douglas turned up his own coat and cuff
     to show a brown triangle within a circle exactly like that which we
     had seen upon the dead man.

     "It was the sight of that which started me on it. I seemed to see it
     all clear at a glance. There were his height and hair and figure,
     about the same as my own. No one could swear to his face, poor devil!
     I brought down this suit of clothes, and in a quarter of an hour
     Barker and I had put my dressing gown on him and he lay as you found
     him. We tied all his things into a bundle, and I weighted them with
     the only weight I could find and put them through the window. The
     card he had meant to lay upon my body was lying beside his own.

     "My rings were put on his finger; but when it came to the wedding
     ring," he held out his muscular hand, "you can see for yourselves
     that I had struck the limit. I have not moved it since the day I was
     married, and it would have taken a file to get it off. I don't know,
     anyhow, that I should have cared to part with it; but if I had wanted
     to I couldn't. So we just had to leave that detail to take care of
     itself. On the other hand, I brought a bit of plaster down and put it
     where I am wearing one myself at this instant. You slipped up there,
     Mr. Holmes, clever as you are; for if you had chanced to take off
     that plaster you would have found no cut underneath it.

     "Well, that was the situation. If I could lie low for a while and
     then get away where I could be joined by my 'widow' we should have a
     chance at last of living in peace for the rest of our lives. These
     devils would give me no rest so long as I was above ground; but if
     they saw in the papers that Baldwin had got his man, there would be
     an end of all my troubles. I hadn't much time to make it all clear to
     Barker and to my wife; but they understood enough to be able to help
     me. I knew all about this hiding place, so did Ames; but it never
     entered his head to connect it with the matter. I retired into it,
     and it was up to Barker to do the rest.

     "I guess you can fill in for yourselves what he did. He opened the
     window and made the mark on the sill to give an idea of how the
     murderer escaped. It was a tall order, that; but as the bridge was up
     there was no other way. Then, when everything was fixed, he rang the
     bell for all he was worth. What happened afterward you know. And so,
     gentlemen, you can do what you please; but I've told you the truth
     and the whole truth, so help me God! What I ask you now is how do I
     stand by the English law?"

     There was a silence which was broken by Sherlock Holmes.

     "The English law is in the main a just law. You will get no worse
     than your deserts from that, Mr. Douglas. But I would ask you how did
     this man know that you lived here, or how to get into your house, or
     where to hide to get you?"

     "I know nothing of this."

     Holmes's face was very white and grave. "The story is not over yet, I
     fear," said he. "You may find worse dangers than the English law, or
     even than your enemies from America. I see trouble before you, Mr.
     Douglas. You'll take my advice and still be on your guard."

     And now, my long-suffering readers, I will ask you to come away with
     me for a time, far from the Sussex Manor House of Birlstone, and far
     also from the year of grace in which we made our eventful journey
     which ended with the strange story of the man who had been known as
     John Douglas. I wish you to journey back some twenty years in time,
     and westward some thousands of miles in space, that I may lay before
     you a singular and terrible narrative--so singular and so terrible
     that you may find it hard to believe that even as I tell it, even so
     did it occur.

     Do not think that I intrude one story before another is finished. As
     you read on you will find that this is not so. And when I have
     detailed those distant events and you have solved this mystery of the
     past, we shall meet once more in those rooms on Baker Street, where
     this, like so many other wonderful happenings, will find its end.









                                      PART II

                                  The Scowrers





          CHAPTER I
          The Man


     It was the fourth of February in the year 1875. It had been a severe
     winter, and the snow lay deep in the gorges of the Gilmerton
     Mountains. The steam ploughs had, however, kept the railroad open,
     and the evening train which connects the long line of coal-mining and
     iron-working settlements was slowly groaning its way up the steep
     gradients which lead from Stagville on the plain to Vermissa, the
     central township which lies at the head of Vermissa Valley. From this
     point the track sweeps downward to Bartons Crossing, Helmdale, and
     the purely agricultural county of Merton. It was a single-track
     railroad; but at every siding--and they were numerous--long lines of
     trucks piled with coal and iron ore told of the hidden wealth which
     had brought a rude population and a bustling life to this most
     desolate corner of the United States of America.

     For desolate it was! Little could the first pioneer who had traversed
     it have ever imagined that the fairest prairies and the most lush
     water pastures were valueless compared to this gloomy land of black
     crag and tangled forest. Above the dark and often scarcely penetrable
     woods upon their flanks, the high, bare crowns of the mountains,
     white snow, and jagged rock towered upon each flank, leaving a long,
     winding, tortuous valley in the centre. Up this the little train was
     slowly crawling.

     The oil lamps had just been lit in the leading passenger car, a long,
     bare carriage in which some twenty or thirty people were seated. The
     greater number of these were workmen returning from their day's toil
     in the lower part of the valley. At least a dozen, by their grimed
     faces and the safety lanterns which they carried, proclaimed
     themselves miners. These sat smoking in a group and conversed in low
     voices, glancing occasionally at two men on the opposite side of the
     car, whose uniforms and badges showed them to be policemen.

     Several women of the labouring class and one or two travellers who
     might have been small local storekeepers made up the rest of the
     company, with the exception of one young man in a corner by himself.
     It is with this man that we are concerned. Take a good look at him,
     for he is worth it.

     He is a fresh-complexioned, middle-sized young man, not far, one
     would guess, from his thirtieth year. He has large, shrewd, humorous
     gray eyes which twinkle inquiringly from time to time as he looks
     round through his spectacles at the people about him. It is easy to
     see that he is of a sociable and possibly simple disposition, anxious
     to be friendly to all men. Anyone could pick him at once as
     gregarious in his habits and communicative in his nature, with a
     quick wit and a ready smile. And yet the man who studied him more
     closely might discern a certain firmness of jaw and grim tightness
     about the lips which would warn him that there were depths beyond,
     and that this pleasant, brown-haired young Irishman might conceivably
     leave his mark for good or evil upon any society to which he was
     introduced.

     Having made one or two tentative remarks to the nearest miner, and
     receiving only short, gruff replies, the traveller resigned himself
     to uncongenial silence, staring moodily out of the window at the
     fading landscape.

     It was not a cheering prospect. Through the growing gloom there
     pulsed the red glow of the furnaces on the sides of the hills. Great
     heaps of slag and dumps of cinders loomed up on each side, with the
     high shafts of the collieries towering above them. Huddled groups of
     mean, wooden houses, the windows of which were beginning to outline
     themselves in light, were scattered here and there along the line,
     and the frequent halting places were crowded with their swarthy
     inhabitants.

     The iron and coal valleys of the Vermissa district were no resorts
     for the leisured or the cultured. Everywhere there were stern signs
     of the crudest battle of life, the rude work to be done, and the
     rude, strong workers who did it.

     The young traveller gazed out into this dismal country with a face of
     mingled repulsion and interest, which showed that the scene was new
     to him. At intervals he drew from his pocket a bulky letter to which
     he referred, and on the margins of which he scribbled some notes.
     Once from the back of his waist he produced something which one would
     hardly have expected to find in the possession of so mild-mannered a
     man. It was a navy revolver of the largest size. As he turned it
     slantwise to the light, the glint upon the rims of the copper shells
     within the drum showed that it was fully loaded. He quickly restored
     it to his secret pocket, but not before it had been observed by a
     working man who had seated himself upon the adjoining bench.

     "Hullo, mate!" said he. "You seem heeled and ready."

     The young man smiled with an air of embarrassment.

     "Yes," said he, "we need them sometimes in the place I come from."

     "And where may that be?"

     "I'm last from Chicago."

     "A stranger in these parts?"

     "Yes."

     "You may find you need it here," said the workman.

     "Ah! is that so?" The young man seemed interested.

     "Have you heard nothing of doings hereabouts?"

     "Nothing out of the way."

     "Why, I thought the country was full of it. You'll hear quick enough.
     What made you come here?"

     "I heard there was always work for a willing man."

     "Are you a member of the union?"

     "Sure."

     "Then you'll get your job, I guess. Have you any friends?"

     "Not yet; but I have the means of making them."

     "How's that, then?"

     "I am one of the Eminent Order of Freemen. There's no town without a
     lodge, and where there is a lodge I'll find my friends."

     The remark had a singular effect upon his companion. He glanced round
     suspiciously at the others in the car. The miners were still
     whispering among themselves. The two police officers were dozing. He
     came across, seated himself close to the young traveller, and held
     out his hand.

     "Put it there," he said.

     A hand-grip passed between the two.

     "I see you speak the truth," said the workman. "But it's well to make
     certain." He raised his right hand to his right eyebrow. The
     traveller at once raised his left hand to his left eyebrow.

     "Dark nights are unpleasant," said the workman.

     "Yes, for strangers to travel," the other answered.

     "That's good enough. I'm Brother Scanlan, Lodge 341, Vermissa Valley.
     Glad to see you in these parts."

     "Thank you. I'm Brother John McMurdo, Lodge 29, Chicago. Bodymaster
     J. H. Scott. But I am in luck to meet a brother so early."

     "Well, there are plenty of us about. You won't find the order more
     flourishing anywhere in the States than right here in Vermissa
     Valley. But we could do with some lads like you. I can't understand a
     spry man of the union finding no work to do in Chicago."

     "I found plenty of work to do," said McMurdo.

     "Then why did you leave?"

     McMurdo nodded towards the policemen and smiled. "I guess those chaps
     would be glad to know," he said.

     Scanlan groaned sympathetically. "In trouble?" he asked in a whisper.

     "Deep."

     "A penitentiary job?"

     "And the rest."

     "Not a killing!"

     "It's early days to talk of such things," said McMurdo with the air
     of a man who had been surprised into saying more than he intended.
     "I've my own good reasons for leaving Chicago, and let that be enough
     for you. Who are you that you should take it on yourself to ask such
     things?" His gray eyes gleamed with sudden and dangerous anger from
     behind his glasses.

     "All right, mate, no offense meant. The boys will think none the
     worse of you, whatever you may have done. Where are you bound for
     now?"

     "Vermissa."

     "That's the third halt down the line. Where are you staying?"

     McMurdo took out an envelope and held it close to the murky oil lamp.
     "Here is the address--Jacob Shafter, Sheridan Street. It's a boarding
     house that was recommended by a man I knew in Chicago."

     "Well, I don't know it; but Vermissa is out of my beat. I live at
     Hobson's Patch, and that's here where we are drawing up. But, say,
     there's one bit of advice I'll give you before we part: If you're in
     trouble in Vermissa, go straight to the Union House and see Boss
     McGinty. He is the Bodymaster of Vermissa Lodge, and nothing can
     happen in these parts unless Black Jack McGinty wants it. So long,
     mate! Maybe we'll meet in lodge one of these evenings. But mind my
     words: If you are in trouble, go to Boss McGinty."

     Scanlan descended, and McMurdo was left once again to his thoughts.
     Night had now fallen, and the flames of the frequent furnaces were
     roaring and leaping in the darkness. Against their lurid background
     dark figures were bending and straining, twisting and turning, with
     the motion of winch or of windlass, to the rhythm of an eternal clank
     and roar.

     "I guess hell must look something like that," said a voice.

     McMurdo turned and saw that one of the policemen had shifted in his
     seat and was staring out into the fiery waste.

     "For that matter," said the other policeman, "I allow that hell must
     be something like that. If there are worse devils down yonder than
     some we could name, it's more than I'd expect. I guess you are new to
     this part, young man?"

     "Well, what if I am?" McMurdo answered in a surly voice.

     "Just this, mister, that I should advise you to be careful in
     choosing your friends. I don't think I'd begin with Mike Scanlan or
     his gang if I were you."

     "What the hell is it to you who are my friends?" roared McMurdo in a
     voice which brought every head in the carriage round to witness the
     altercation. "Did I ask you for your advice, or did you think me such
     a sucker that I couldn't move without it? You speak when you are
     spoken to, and by the Lord you'd have to wait a long time if it was
     me!" He thrust out his face and grinned at the patrolmen like a
     snarling dog.

     The two policemen, heavy, good-natured men, were taken aback by the
     extraordinary vehemence with which their friendly advances had been
     rejected.

     "No offense, stranger," said one. "It was a warning for your own
     good, seeing that you are, by your own showing, new to the place."

     "I'm new to the place; but I'm not new to you and your kind!" cried
     McMurdo in cold fury. "I guess you're the same in all places, shoving
     your advice in when nobody asks for it."

     "Maybe we'll see more of you before very long," said one of the
     patrolmen with a grin. "You're a real hand-picked one, if I am a
     judge."

     "I was thinking the same," remarked the other. "I guess we may meet
     again."

     "I'm not afraid of you, and don't you think it!" cried McMurdo. "My
     name's Jack McMurdo--see? If you want me, you'll find me at Jacob
     Shafter's on Sheridan Street, Vermissa; so I'm not hiding from you,
     am I? Day or night I dare to look the like of you in the face--don't
     make any mistake about that!"

     There was a murmur of sympathy and admiration from the miners at the
     dauntless demeanour of the newcomer, while the two policemen shrugged
     their shoulders and renewed a conversation between themselves.

     A few minutes later the train ran into the ill-lit station, and there
     was a general clearing; for Vermissa was by far the largest town on
     the line. McMurdo picked up his leather gripsack and was about to
     start off into the darkness, when one of the miners accosted him.

     "By Gar, mate! you know how to speak to the cops," he said in a voice
     of awe. "It was grand to hear you. Let me carry your grip and show
     you the road. I'm passing Shafter's on the way to my own shack."

     There was a chorus of friendly "Good-nights" from the other miners as
     they passed from the platform. Before ever he had set foot in it,
     McMurdo the turbulent had become a character in Vermissa.

     The country had been a place of terror; but the town was in its way
     even more depressing. Down that long valley there was at least a
     certain gloomy grandeur in the huge fires and the clouds of drifting
     smoke, while the strength and industry of man found fitting monuments
     in the hills which he had spilled by the side of his monstrous
     excavations. But the town showed a dead level of mean ugliness and
     squalor. The broad street was churned up by the traffic into a
     horrible rutted paste of muddy snow. The sidewalks were narrow and
     uneven. The numerous gas-lamps served only to show more clearly a
     long line of wooden houses, each with its veranda facing the street,
     unkempt and dirty.

     As they approached the centre of the town the scene was brightened by
     a row of well-lit stores, and even more by a cluster of saloons and
     gaming houses, in which the miners spent their hard-earned but
     generous wages.

     "That's the Union House," said the guide, pointing to one saloon
     which rose almost to the dignity of being a hotel. "Jack McGinty is
     the boss there."

     "What sort of a man is he?" McMurdo asked.

     "What! have you never heard of the boss?"

     "How could I have heard of him when you know that I am a stranger in
     these parts?"

     "Well, I thought his name was known clear across the country. It's
     been in the papers often enough."

     "What for?"

     "Well," the miner lowered his voice--"over the affairs."

     "What affairs?"

     "Good Lord, mister! you are queer, if I must say it without offense.
     There's only one set of affairs that you'll hear of in these parts,
     and that's the affairs of the Scowrers."

     "Why, I seem to have read of the Scowrers in Chicago. A gang of
     murderers, are they not?"

     "Hush, on your life!" cried the miner, standing still in alarm, and
     gazing in amazement at his companion. "Man, you won't live long in
     these parts if you speak in the open street like that. Many a man has
     had the life beaten out of him for less."

     "Well, I know nothing about them. It's only what I have read."

     "And I'm not saying that you have not read the truth." The man looked
     nervously round him as he spoke, peering into the shadows as if he
     feared to see some lurking danger. "If killing is murder, then God
     knows there is murder and to spare. But don't you dare to breathe the
     name of Jack McGinty in connection with it, stranger; for every
     whisper goes back to him, and he is not one that is likely to let it
     pass. Now, that's the house you're after, that one standing back from
     the street. You'll find old Jacob Shafter that runs it as honest a
     man as lives in this township."

     "I thank you," said McMurdo, and shaking hands with his new
     acquaintance he plodded, gripsack in hand, up the path which led to
     the dwelling house, at the door of which he gave a resounding knock.

     It was opened at once by someone very different from what he had
     expected. It was a woman, young and singularly beautiful. She was of
     the German type, blonde and fair-haired, with the piquant contrast of
     a pair of beautiful dark eyes with which she surveyed the stranger
     with surprise and a pleasing embarrassment which brought a wave of
     colour over her pale face. Framed in the bright light of the open
     doorway, it seemed to McMurdo that he had never seen a more beautiful
     picture; the more attractive for its contrast with the sordid and
     gloomy surroundings. A lovely violet growing upon one of those black
     slag-heaps of the mines would not have seemed more surprising. So
     entranced was he that he stood staring without a word, and it was she
     who broke the silence.

     "I thought it was father," said she with a pleasing little touch of a
     German accent. "Did you come to see him? He is downtown. I expect him
     back every minute."

     McMurdo continued to gaze at her in open admiration until her eyes
     dropped in confusion before this masterful visitor.

     "No, miss," he said at last, "I'm in no hurry to see him. But your
     house was recommended to me for board. I thought it might suit
     me--and now I know it will."

     "You are quick to make up your mind," said she with a smile.

     "Anyone but a blind man could do as much," the other answered.

     She laughed at the compliment. "Come right in, sir," she said. "I'm
     Miss Ettie Shafter, Mr. Shafter's daughter. My mother's dead, and I
     run the house. You can sit down by the stove in the front room until
     father comes along--Ah, here he is! So you can fix things with him
     right away."

     A heavy, elderly man came plodding up the path. In a few words
     McMurdo explained his business. A man of the name of Murphy had given
     him the address in Chicago. He in turn had had it from someone else.
     Old Shafter was quite ready. The stranger made no bones about terms,
     agreed at once to every condition, and was apparently fairly flush of
     money. For seven dollars a week paid in advance he was to have board
     and lodging.

     So it was that McMurdo, the self-confessed fugitive from justice,
     took up his abode under the roof of the Shafters, the first step
     which was to lead to so long and dark a train of events, ending in a
     far distant land.





          CHAPTER II
          The Bodymaster


     McMurdo was a man who made his mark quickly. Wherever he was the folk
     around soon knew it. Within a week he had become infinitely the most
     important person at Shafter's. There were ten or a dozen boarders
     there; but they were honest foremen or commonplace clerks from the
     stores, of a very different calibre from the young Irishman. Of an
     evening when they gathered together his joke was always the readiest,
     his conversation the brightest, and his song the best. He was a born
     boon companion, with a magnetism which drew good humour from all
     around him.

     And yet he showed again and again, as he had shown in the railway
     carriage, a capacity for sudden, fierce anger, which compelled the
     respect and even the fear of those who met him. For the law, too, and
     all who were connected with it, he exhibited a bitter contempt which
     delighted some and alarmed others of his fellow boarders.

     From the first he made it evident, by his open admiration, that the
     daughter of the house had won his heart from the instant that he had
     set eyes upon her beauty and her grace. He was no backward suitor. On
     the second day he told her that he loved her, and from then onward he
     repeated the same story with an absolute disregard of what she might
     say to discourage him.

     "Someone else?" he would cry. "Well, the worse luck for someone else!
     Let him look out for himself! Am I to lose my life's chance and all
     my heart's desire for someone else? You can keep on saying no, Ettie:
     the day will come when you will say yes, and I'm young enough to
     wait."

     He was a dangerous suitor, with his glib Irish tongue, and his
     pretty, coaxing ways. There was about him also that glamour of
     experience and of mystery which attracts a woman's interest, and
     finally her love. He could talk of the sweet valleys of County
     Monaghan from which he came, of the lovely, distant island, the low
     hills and green meadows of which seemed the more beautiful when
     imagination viewed them from this place of grime and snow.

     Then he was versed in the life of the cities of the North, of
     Detroit, and the lumber camps of Michigan, and finally of Chicago,
     where he had worked in a planing mill. And afterwards came the hint
     of romance, the feeling that strange things had happened to him in
     that great city, so strange and so intimate that they might not be
     spoken of. He spoke wistfully of a sudden leaving, a breaking of old
     ties, a flight into a strange world, ending in this dreary valley,
     and Ettie listened, her dark eyes gleaming with pity and with
     sympathy--those two qualities which may turn so rapidly and so
     naturally to love.

     McMurdo had obtained a temporary job as bookkeeper; for he was a
     well-educated man. This kept him out most of the day, and he had not
     found occasion yet to report himself to the head of the lodge of the
     Eminent Order of Freemen. He was reminded of his omission, however,
     by a visit one evening from Mike Scanlan, the fellow member whom he
     had met in the train. Scanlan, the small, sharp-faced, nervous,
     black-eyed man, seemed glad to see him once more. After a glass or
     two of whisky he broached the object of his visit.

     "Say, McMurdo," said he, "I remembered your address, so l made bold
     to call. I'm surprised that you've not reported to the Bodymaster.
     Why haven't you seen Boss McGinty yet?"

     "Well, I had to find a job. I have been busy."

     "You must find time for him if you have none for anything else. Good
     Lord, man! you're a fool not to have been down to the Union House and
     registered your name the first morning after you came here! If you
     run against him--well, you mustn't, that's all!"

     McMurdo showed mild surprise. "I've been a member of the lodge for
     over two years, Scanlan, but I never heard that duties were so
     pressing as all that."

     "Maybe not in Chicago."

     "Well, it's the same society here."

     "Is it?"

     Scanlan looked at him long and fixedly. There was something sinister
     in his eyes.

     "Isn't it?"

     "You'll tell me that in a month's time. I hear you had a talk with
     the patrolmen after I left the train."

     "How did you know that?"

     "Oh, it got about--things do get about for good and for bad in this
     district."

     "Well, yes. I told the hounds what I thought of them."

     "By the Lord, you'll be a man after McGinty's heart!"

     "What, does he hate the police too?"

     Scanlan burst out laughing. "You go and see him, my lad," said he as
     he took his leave. "It's not the police but you that he'll hate if
     you don't! Now, take a friend's advice and go at once!"

     It chanced that on the same evening McMurdo had another more pressing
     interview which urged him in the same direction. It may have been
     that his attentions to Ettie had been more evident than before, or
     that they had gradually obtruded themselves into the slow mind of his
     good German host; but, whatever the cause, the boarding-house keeper
     beckoned the young man into his private room and started on the
     subject without any circumlocution.

     "It seems to me, mister," said he, "that you are gettin' set on my
     Ettie. Ain't that so, or am I wrong?"

     "Yes, that is so," the young man answered.

     "Vell, I vant to tell you right now that it ain't no manner of use.
     There's someone slipped in afore you."

     "She told me so."

     "Vell, you can lay that she told you truth. But did she tell you who
     it vas?"

     "No, I asked her; but she wouldn't tell."

     "I dare say not, the leetle baggage! Perhaps she did not vish to
     frighten you avay."

     "Frighten!" McMurdo was on fire in a moment.

     "Ah, yes, my friend! You need not be ashamed to be frightened of him.
     It is Teddy Baldwin."

     "And who the devil is he?"

     "He is a boss of Scowrers."

     "Scowrers! I've heard of them before. It's Scowrers here and Scowrers
     there, and always in a whisper! What are you all afraid of? Who are
     the Scowrers?"

     The boarding-house keeper instinctively sank his voice, as everyone
     did who talked about that terrible society. "The Scowrers," said he,
     "are the Eminent Order of Freemen!"

     The young man stared. "Why, I am a member of that order myself."

     "You! I vould never have had you in my house if I had known it--not
     if you vere to pay me a hundred dollar a week."

     "What's wrong with the order? It's for charity and good fellowship.
     The rules say so."

     "Maybe in some places. Not here!"

     "What is it here?"

     "It's a murder society, that's vat it is."

     McMurdo laughed incredulously. "How can you prove that?" he asked.

     "Prove it! Are there not fifty murders to prove it? Vat about Milman
     and Van Shorst, and the Nicholson family, and old Mr. Hyam, and
     little Billy James, and the others? Prove it! Is there a man or a
     voman in this valley vat does not know it?"

     "See here!" said McMurdo earnestly. "I want you to take back what
     you've said, or else make it good. One or the other you must do
     before I quit this room. Put yourself in my place. Here am I, a
     stranger in the town. I belong to a society that I know only as an
     innocent one. You'll find it through the length and breadth of the
     States, but always as an innocent one. Now, when I am counting upon
     joining it here, you tell me that it is the same as a murder society
     called the Scowrers. I guess you owe me either an apology or else an
     explanation, Mr. Shafter."

     "I can but tell you vat the whole vorld knows, mister. The bosses of
     the one are the bosses of the other. If you offend the one, it is the
     other vat vill strike you. We have proved it too often."

     "That's just gossip--I want proof!" said McMurdo.

     "If you live here long you vill get your proof. But I forget that you
     are yourself one of them. You vill soon be as bad as the rest. But
     you vill find other lodgings, mister. I cannot have you here. Is it
     not bad enough that one of these people come courting my Ettie, and
     that I dare not turn him down, but that I should have another for my
     boarder? Yes, indeed, you shall not sleep here after to-night!"

     McMurdo found himself under sentence of banishment both from his
     comfortable quarters and from the girl whom he loved. He found her
     alone in the sitting-room that same evening, and he poured his
     troubles into her ear.

     "Sure, your father is after giving me notice," he said. "It's little
     I would care if it was just my room, but indeed, Ettie, though it's
     only a week that I've known you, you are the very breath of life to
     me, and I can't live without you!"

     "Oh, hush, Mr. McMurdo, don't speak so!" said the girl. "I have told
     you, have I not, that you are too late? There is another, and if I
     have not promised to marry him at once, at least I can promise no one
     else."

     "Suppose I had been first, Ettie, would I have had a chance?"

     The girl sank her face into her hands. "I wish to heaven that you had
     been first!" she sobbed.

     McMurdo was down on his knees before her in an instant. "For God's
     sake, Ettie, let it stand at that!" he cried. "Will you ruin your
     life and my own for the sake of this promise? Follow your heart,
     acushla! 'Tis a safer guide than any promise before you knew what it
     was that you were saying."

     He had seized Ettie's white hand between his own strong brown ones.

     "Say that you will be mine, and we will face it out together!"

     "Not here?"

     "Yes, here."

     "No, no, Jack!" His arms were round her now. "It could not be here.
     Could you take me away?"

     A struggle passed for a moment over McMurdo's face; but it ended by
     setting like granite. "No, here," he said. "I'll hold you against the
     world, Ettie, right here where we are!"

     "Why should we not leave together?"

     "No, Ettie, I can't leave here."

     "But why?"

     "I'd never hold my head up again if I felt that I had been driven
     out. Besides, what is there to be afraid of? Are we not free folks in
     a free country? If you love me, and I you, who will dare to come
     between?"

     "You don't know, Jack. You've been here too short a time. You don't
     know this Baldwin. You don't know McGinty and his Scowrers."

     "No, I don't know them, and I don't fear them, and I don't believe in
     them!" said McMurdo. "I've lived among rough men, my darling, and
     instead of fearing them it has always ended that they have feared
     me--always, Ettie. It's mad on the face of it! If these men, as your
     father says, have done crime after crime in the valley, and if
     everyone knows them by name, how comes it that none are brought to
     justice? You answer me that, Ettie!"

     "Because no witness dares to appear against them. He would not live a
     month if he did. Also because they have always their own men to swear
     that the accused one was far from the scene of the crime. But surely,
     Jack, you must have read all this. I had understood that every paper
     in the United States was writing about it."

     "Well, I have read something, it is true; but I had thought it was a
     story. Maybe these men have some reason in what they do. Maybe they
     are wronged and have no other way to help themselves."

     "Oh, Jack, don't let me hear you speak so! That is how he speaks--the
     other one!"

     "Baldwin--he speaks like that, does he?"

     "And that is why I loathe him so. Oh, Jack, now I can tell you the
     truth. I loathe him with all my heart; but I fear him also. I fear
     him for myself; but above all I fear him for father. I know that some
     great sorrow would come upon us if I dared to say what I really felt.
     That is why I have put him off with half-promises. It was in real
     truth our only hope. But if you would fly with me, Jack, we could
     take father with us and live forever far from the power of these
     wicked men."

     Again there was the struggle upon McMurdo's face, and again it set
     like granite. "No harm shall come to you, Ettie--nor to your father
     either. As to wicked men, I expect you may find that I am as bad as
     the worst of them before we're through."

     "No, no, Jack! I would trust you anywhere."

     McMurdo laughed bitterly. "Good Lord! how little you know of me! Your
     innocent soul, my darling, could not even guess what is passing in
     mine. But, hullo, who's the visitor?"

     The door had opened suddenly, and a young fellow came swaggering in
     with the air of one who is the master. He was a handsome, dashing
     young man of about the same age and build as McMurdo himself. Under
     his broad-brimmed black felt hat, which he had not troubled to
     remove, a handsome face with fierce, domineering eyes and a curved
     hawk-bill of a nose looked savagely at the pair who sat by the stove.

     Ettie had jumped to her feet full of confusion and alarm. "I'm glad
     to see you, Mr. Baldwin," said she. "You're earlier than I had
     thought. Come and sit down."

     Baldwin stood with his hands on his hips looking at McMurdo. "Who is
     this?" he asked curtly.

     "It's a friend of mine, Mr. Baldwin, a new boarder here. Mr. McMurdo,
     may I introduce you to Mr. Baldwin?"

     The young men nodded in surly fashion to each other.

     "Maybe Miss Ettie has told you how it is with us?" said Baldwin.

     "I didn't understand that there was any relation between you."

     "Didn't you? Well, you can understand it now. You can take it from me
     that this young lady is mine, and you'll find it a very fine evening
     for a walk."

     "Thank you, I am in no humour for a walk."

     "Aren't you?" The man's savage eyes were blazing with anger. "Maybe
     you are in a humour for a fight, Mr. Boarder!"

     "That I am!" cried McMurdo, springing to his feet. "You never said a
     more welcome word."

     "For God's sake, Jack! Oh, for God's sake!" cried poor, distracted
     Ettie. "Oh, Jack, Jack, he will hurt you!"

     "Oh, it's Jack, is it?" said Baldwin with an oath. "You've come to
     that already, have you?"

     "Oh, Ted, be reasonable--be kind! For my sake, Ted, if ever you loved
     me, be big-hearted and forgiving!"

     "I think, Ettie, that if you were to leave us alone we could get this
     thing settled," said McMurdo quietly. "Or maybe, Mr. Baldwin, you
     will take a turn down the street with me. It's a fine evening, and
     there's some open ground beyond the next block."

     "I'll get even with you without needing to dirty my hands," said his
     enemy. "You'll wish you had never set foot in this house before I am
     through with you!"

     "No time like the present," cried McMurdo.

     "I'll choose my own time, mister. You can leave the time to me. See
     here!" He suddenly rolled up his sleeve and showed upon his forearm a
     peculiar sign which appeared to have been branded there. It was a
     circle with a triangle within it. "D'you know what that means?"

     "I neither know nor care!"

     "Well, you will know, I'll promise you that. You won't be much older,
     either. Perhaps Miss Ettie can tell you something about it. As to
     you, Ettie, you'll come back to me on your knees--d'ye hear,
     girl?--on your knees--and then I'll tell you what your punishment may
     be. You've sowed--and by the Lord, I'll see that you reap!" He
     glanced at them both in fury. Then he turned upon his heel, and an
     instant later the outer door had banged behind him.

     For a few moments McMurdo and the girl stood in silence. Then she
     threw her arms around him.

     "Oh, Jack, how brave you were! But it is no use, you must fly!
     To-night--Jack--to-night! It's your only hope. He will have your
     life. I read it in his horrible eyes. What chance have you against a
     dozen of them, with Boss McGinty and all the power of the lodge
     behind them?"

     McMurdo disengaged her hands, kissed her, and gently pushed her back
     into a chair. "There, acushla, there! Don't be disturbed or fear for
     me. I'm a Freeman myself. I'm after telling your father about it.
     Maybe I am no better than the others; so don't make a saint of me.
     Perhaps you hate me too, now that I've told you as much?"

     "Hate you, Jack? While life lasts I could never do that! I've heard
     that there is no harm in being a Freeman anywhere but here; so why
     should I think the worse of you for that? But if you are a Freeman,
     Jack, why should you not go down and make a friend of Boss McGinty?
     Oh, hurry, Jack, hurry! Get your word in first, or the hounds will be
     on your trail."

     "I was thinking the same thing," said McMurdo. "I'll go right now and
     fix it. You can tell your father that I'll sleep here to-night and
     find some other quarters in the morning."

     The bar of McGinty's saloon was crowded as usual, for it was the
     favourite loafing place of all the rougher elements of the town. The
     man was popular; for he had a rough, jovial disposition which formed
     a mask, covering a great deal which lay behind it. But apart from
     this popularity, the fear in which he was held throughout the
     township, and indeed down the whole thirty miles of the valley and
     past the mountains on each side of it, was enough in itself to fill
     his bar; for none could afford to neglect his good will.

     Besides those secret powers which it was universally believed that he
     exercised in so pitiless a fashion, he was a high public official, a
     municipal councillor, and a commissioner of roads, elected to the
     office through the votes of the ruffians who in turn expected to
     receive favours at his hands. Assessments and taxes were enormous;
     the public works were notoriously neglected, the accounts were
     slurred over by bribed auditors, and the decent citizen was
     terrorized into paying public blackmail, and holding his tongue lest
     some worse thing befall him.

     Thus it was that, year by year, Boss McGinty's diamond pins became
     more obtrusive, his gold chains more weighty across a more gorgeous
     vest, and his saloon stretched farther and farther, until it
     threatened to absorb one whole side of the Market Square.

     McMurdo pushed open the swinging door of the saloon and made his way
     amid the crowd of men within, through an atmosphere blurred with
     tobacco smoke and heavy with the smell of spirits. The place was
     brilliantly lighted, and the huge, heavily gilt mirrors upon every
     wall reflected and multiplied the garish illumination. There were
     several bartenders in their shirt sleeves, hard at work mixing drinks
     for the loungers who fringed the broad, brass-trimmed counter.

     At the far end, with his body resting upon the bar and a cigar stuck
     at an acute angle from the corner of his mouth, stood a tall, strong,
     heavily built man who could be none other than the famous McGinty
     himself. He was a black-maned giant, bearded to the cheek-bones, and
     with a shock of raven hair which fell to his collar. His complexion
     was as swarthy as that of an Italian, and his eyes were of a strange
     dead black, which, combined with a slight squint, gave them a
     particularly sinister appearance.

     All else in the man--his noble proportions, his fine features, and
     his frank bearing--fitted in with that jovial, man-to-man manner
     which he affected. Here, one would say, is a bluff, honest fellow,
     whose heart would be sound however rude his outspoken words might
     seem. It was only when those dead, dark eyes, deep and remorseless,
     were turned upon a man that he shrank within himself, feeling that he
     was face to face with an infinite possibility of latent evil, with a
     strength and courage and cunning behind it which made it a thousand
     times more deadly.

     Having had a good look at his man, McMurdo elbowed his way forward
     with his usual careless audacity, and pushed himself through the
     little group of courtiers who were fawning upon the powerful boss,
     laughing uproariously at the smallest of his jokes. The young
     stranger's bold gray eyes looked back fearlessly through their
     glasses at the deadly black ones which turned sharply upon him.

     "Well, young man, I can't call your face to mind."

     "I'm new here, Mr. McGinty."

     "You are not so new that you can't give a gentleman his proper
     title."

     "He's Councillor McGinty, young man," said a voice from the group.

     "I'm sorry, Councillor. I'm strange to the ways of the place. But I
     was advised to see you."

     "Well, you see me. This is all there is. What d'you think of me?"

     "Well, it's early days. If your heart is as big as your body, and
     your soul as fine as your face, then I'd ask for nothing better,"
     said McMurdo.

     "By Gar! you've got an Irish tongue in your head anyhow," cried the
     saloon-keeper, not quite certain whether to humour this audacious
     visitor or to stand upon his dignity.

     "So you are good enough to pass my appearance?"

     "Sure," said McMurdo.

     "And you were told to see me?"

     "I was."

     "And who told you?"

     "Brother Scanlan of Lodge 341, Vermissa. I drink your health
     Councillor, and to our better acquaintance." He raised a glass with
     which he had been served to his lips and elevated his little finger
     as he drank it.

     McGinty, who had been watching him narrowly, raised his thick black
     eyebrows. "Oh, it's like that, is it?" said he. "I'll have to look a
     bit closer into this, Mister--"

     "McMurdo."

     "A bit closer, Mr. McMurdo; for we don't take folk on trust in these
     parts, nor believe all we're told neither. Come in here for a moment,
     behind the bar."

     There was a small room there, lined with barrels. McGinty carefully
     closed the door, and then seated himself on one of them, biting
     thoughtfully on his cigar and surveying his companion with those
     disquieting eyes. For a couple of minutes he sat in complete silence.
     McMurdo bore the inspection cheerfully, one hand in his coat pocket,
     the other twisting his brown moustache. Suddenly McGinty stooped and
     produced a wicked-looking revolver.

     "See here, my joker," said he, "if I thought you were playing any
     game on us, it would be short work for you."

     "This is a strange welcome," McMurdo answered with some dignity, "for
     the Bodymaster of a lodge of Freemen to give to a stranger brother."

     "Ay, but it's just that same that you have to prove," said McGinty,
     "and God help you if you fail! Where were you made?"

     "Lodge 29, Chicago."

     "When?"

     "June 24, 1872."

     "What Bodymaster?"

     "James H. Scott."

     "Who is your district ruler?"

     "Bartholomew Wilson."

     "Hum! You seem glib enough in your tests. What are you doing here?"

     "Working, the same as you--but a poorer job."

     "You have your back answer quick enough."

     "Yes, I was always quick of speech."

     "Are you quick of action?"

     "I have had that name among those that knew me best."

     "Well, we may try you sooner than you think. Have you heard anything
     of the lodge in these parts?"

     "I've heard that it takes a man to be a brother."

     "True for you, Mr. McMurdo. Why did you leave Chicago?"

     "I'm damned if I tell you that!"

     McGinty opened his eyes. He was not used to being answered in such
     fashion, and it amused him. "Why won't you tell me?"

     "Because no brother may tell another a lie."

     "Then the truth is too bad to tell?"

     "You can put it that way if you like."

     "See here, mister, you can't expect me, as Bodymaster, to pass into
     the lodge a man for whose past he can't answer."

     McMurdo looked puzzled. Then he took a worn newspaper cutting from an
     inner pocket.

     "You wouldn't squeal on a fellow?" said he.

     "I'll wipe my hand across your face if you say such words to me!"
     cried McGinty hotly.

     "You are right, Councillor," said McMurdo meekly. "I should
     apologize. I spoke without thought. Well, I know that I am safe in
     your hands. Look at that clipping."

     McGinty glanced his eyes over the account of the shooting of one
     Jonas Pinto, in the Lake Saloon, Market Street, Chicago, in the New
     Year week of 1874.

     "Your work?" he asked, as he handed back the paper.

     McMurdo nodded.

     "Why did you shoot him?"

     "I was helping Uncle Sam to make dollars. Maybe mine were not as good
     gold as his, but they looked as well and were cheaper to make. This
     man Pinto helped me to shove the queer--"

     "To do what?"

     "Well, it means to pass the dollars out into circulation. Then he
     said he would split. Maybe he did split. I didn't wait to see. I just
     killed him and lighted out for the coal country."

     "Why the coal country?"

     "'Cause I'd read in the papers that they weren't too particular in
     those parts."

     McGinty laughed. "You were first a coiner and then a murderer, and
     you came to these parts because you thought you'd be welcome."

     "That's about the size of it," McMurdo answered.

     "Well, I guess you'll go far. Say, can you make those dollars yet?"

     McMurdo took half a dozen from his pocket. "Those never passed the
     Philadelphia mint," said he.

     "You don't say!" McGinty held them to the light in his enormous hand,
     which was hairy as a gorilla's. "I can see no difference. Gar! you'll
     be a mighty useful brother, I'm thinking! We can do with a bad man or
     two among us, Friend McMurdo: for there are times when we have to
     take our own part. We'd soon be against the wall if we didn't shove
     back at those that were pushing us."

     "Well, I guess I'll do my share of shoving with the rest of the
     boys."

     "You seem to have a good nerve. You didn't squirm when I shoved this
     gun at you."

     "It was not me that was in danger."

     "Who then?"

     "It was you, Councillor." McMurdo drew a cocked pistol from the side
     pocket of his peajacket. "I was covering you all the time. I guess my
     shot would have been as quick as yours."

     "By Gar!" McGinty flushed an angry red and then burst into a roar of
     laughter. "Say, we've had no such holy terror come to hand this many
     a year. I reckon the lodge will learn to be proud of you ... Well,
     what the hell do you want? And can't I speak alone with a gentleman
     for five minutes but you must butt in on us?"

     The bartender stood abashed. "I'm sorry, Councillor, but it's Ted
     Baldwin. He says he must see you this very minute."

     The message was unnecessary; for the set, cruel face of the man
     himself was looking over the servant's shoulder. He pushed the
     bartender out and closed the door on him.

     "So," said he with a furious glance at McMurdo, "you got here first,
     did you? I've a word to say to you, Councillor, about this man."

     "Then say it here and now before my face," cried McMurdo.

     "I'll say it at my own time, in my own way."

     "Tut! Tut!" said McGinty, getting off his barrel. "This will never
     do. We have a new brother here, Baldwin, and it's not for us to greet
     him in such fashion. Hold out your hand, man, and make it up!"

     "Never!" cried Baldwin in a fury.

     "I've offered to fight him if he thinks I have wronged him," said
     McMurdo. "I'll fight him with fists, or, if that won't satisfy him,
     I'll fight him any other way he chooses. Now, I'll leave it to you,
     Councillor, to judge between us as a Bodymaster should."

     "What is it, then?"

     "A young lady. She's free to choose for herself."

     "Is she?" cried Baldwin.

     "As between two brothers of the lodge I should say that she was,"
     said the Boss.

     "Oh, that's your ruling, is it?"

     "Yes, it is, Ted Baldwin," said McGinty, with a wicked stare. "Is it
     you that would dispute it?"

     "You would throw over one that has stood by you this five years in
     favour of a man that you never saw before in your life? You're not
     Bodymaster for life, Jack McGinty, and by God! when next it comes to
     a vote--"

     The Councillor sprang at him like a tiger. His hand closed round the
     other's neck, and he hurled him back across one of the barrels. In
     his mad fury he would have squeezed the life out of him if McMurdo
     had not interfered.

     "Easy, Councillor! For heaven's sake, go easy!" he cried, as he
     dragged him back.

     McGinty released his hold, and Baldwin, cowed and shaken gasping for
     breath, and shivering in every limb, as one who has looked over the
     very edge of death, sat up on the barrel over which he had been
     hurled.

     "You've been asking for it this many a day, Ted Baldwin--now you've
     got it!" cried McGinty, his huge chest rising and falling. "Maybe you
     think if I was voted down from Bodymaster you would find yourself in
     my shoes. It's for the lodge to say that. But so long as I am the
     chief I'll have no man lift his voice against me or my rulings."

     "I have nothing against you," mumbled Baldwin, feeling his throat.

     "Well, then," cried the other, relapsing in a moment into a bluff
     joviality, "we are all good friends again and there's an end of the
     matter."

     He took a bottle of champagne down from the shelf and twisted out the
     cork.

     "See now," he continued, as he filled three high glasses. "Let us
     drink the quarrelling toast of the lodge. After that, as you know,
     there can be no bad blood between us. Now, then the left hand on the
     apple of my throat. I say to you, Ted Baldwin, what is the offense,
     sir?"

     "The clouds are heavy," answered Baldwin.

     "But they will forever brighten."

     "And this I swear!"

     The men drank their glasses, and the same ceremony was performed
     between Baldwin and McMurdo

     "There!" cried McGinty, rubbing his hands. "That's the end of the
     black blood. You come under lodge discipline if it goes further, and
     that's a heavy hand in these parts, as Brother Baldwin knows--and as
     you will damn soon find out, Brother McMurdo, if you ask for
     trouble!"

     "Faith, I'd be slow to do that," said McMurdo. He held out his hand
     to Baldwin. "I'm quick to quarrel and quick to forgive. It's my hot
     Irish blood, they tell me. But it's over for me, and I bear no
     grudge."

     Baldwin had to take the proffered hand, for the baleful eye of the
     terrible Boss was upon him. But his sullen face showed how little the
     words of the other had moved him.

     McGinty clapped them both on the shoulders. "Tut! These girls! These
     girls!" he cried. "To think that the same petticoats should come
     between two of my boys! It's the devil's own luck! Well, it's the
     colleen inside of them that must settle the question for it's outside
     the jurisdiction of a Bodymaster--and the Lord be praised for that!
     We have enough on us, without the women as well. You'll have to be
     affiliated to Lodge 341, Brother McMurdo. We have our own ways and
     methods, different from Chicago. Saturday night is our meeting, and
     if you come then, we'll make you free forever of the Vermissa
     Valley."





          CHAPTER III
          Lodge 341, Vermissa


     On the day following the evening which had contained so many exciting
     events, McMurdo moved his lodgings from old Jacob Shafter's and took
     up his quarters at the Widow MacNamara's on the extreme outskirts of
     the town. Scanlan, his original acquaintance aboard the train, had
     occasion shortly afterwards to move into Vermissa, and the two lodged
     together. There was no other boarder, and the hostess was an
     easy-going old Irishwoman who left them to themselves; so that they
     had a freedom for speech and action welcome to men who had secrets in
     common.

     Shafter had relented to the extent of letting McMurdo come to his
     meals there when he liked; so that his intercourse with Ettie was by
     no means broken. On the contrary, it drew closer and more intimate as
     the weeks went by.

     In his bedroom at his new abode McMurdo felt it safe to take out the
     coining moulds, and under many a pledge of secrecy a number of
     brothers from the lodge were allowed to come in and see them, each
     carrying away in his pocket some examples of the false money, so
     cunningly struck that there was never the slightest difficulty or
     danger in passing it. Why, with such a wonderful art at his command,
     McMurdo should condescend to work at all was a perpetual mystery to
     his companions; though he made it clear to anyone who asked him that
     if he lived without any visible means it would very quickly bring the
     police upon his track.

     One policeman was indeed after him already; but the incident, as luck
     would have it, did the adventurer a great deal more good than harm.
     After the first introduction there were few evenings when he did not
     find his way to McGinty's saloon, there to make closer acquaintance
     with "the boys," which was the jovial title by which the dangerous
     gang who infested the place were known to one another. His dashing
     manner and fearlessness of speech made him a favourite with them all;
     while the rapid and scientific way in which he polished off his
     antagonist in an "all in" bar-room scrap earned the respect of that
     rough community. Another incident, however, raised him even higher in
     their estimation.

     Just at the crowded hour one night, the door opened and a man entered
     with the quiet blue uniform and peaked cap of the mine police. This
     was a special body raised by the railways and colliery owners to
     supplement the efforts of the ordinary civil police, who were
     perfectly helpless in the face of the organized ruffianism which
     terrorized the district. There was a hush as he entered, and many a
     curious glance was cast at him; but the relations between policemen
     and criminals are peculiar in some parts of the States, and McGinty
     himself standing behind his counter, showed no surprise when the
     policeman enrolled himself among his customers.

     "A straight whisky, for the night is bitter," said the police
     officer. "I don't think we have met before, Councillor?"

     "You'll be the new captain?" said McGinty.

     "That's so. We're looking to you, Councillor, and to the other
     leading citizens, to help us in upholding law and order in this
     township. Captain Marvin is my name."

     "We'd do better without you, Captain Marvin," said McGinty coldly;
     "for we have our own police of the township, and no need for any
     imported goods. What are you but the paid tool of the capitalists,
     hired by them to club or shoot your poorer fellow citizen?"

     "Well, well, we won't argue about that," said the police officer
     good-humouredly. "I expect we all do our duty same as we see it; but
     we can't all see it the same." He had drunk off his glass and had
     turned to go, when his eyes fell upon the face of Jack McMurdo, who
     was scowling at his elbow. "Hullo! Hullo!" he cried, looking him up
     and down. "Here's an old acquaintance!"

     McMurdo shrank away from him. "I was never a friend to you nor any
     other cursed copper in my life," said he.

     "An acquaintance isn't always a friend," said the police captain,
     grinning. "You're Jack McMurdo of Chicago, right enough, and don't
     you deny it!"

     McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "I'm not denying it," said he. "D'ye
     think I'm ashamed of my own name?"

     "You've got good cause to be, anyhow."

     "What the devil d'you mean by that?" he roared with his fists
     clenched.

     "No, no, Jack, bluster won't do with me. I was an officer in Chicago
     before ever I came to this darned coal bunker, and I know a Chicago
     crook when I see one."

     McMurdo's face fell. "Don't tell me that you're Marvin of the Chicago
     Central!" he cried.

     "Just the same old Teddy Marvin, at your service. We haven't
     forgotten the shooting of Jonas Pinto up there."

     "I never shot him."

     "Did you not? That's good impartial evidence, ain't it? Well, his
     death came in uncommon handy for you, or they would have had you for
     shoving the queer. Well, we can let that be bygones; for, between you
     and me--and perhaps I'm going further than my duty in saying it--they
     could get no clear case against you, and Chicago's open to you
     to-morrow."

     "I'm very well where I am."

     "Well, I've given you the pointer, and you're a sulky dog not to
     thank me for it."

     "Well, I suppose you mean well, and I do thank you," said McMurdo in
     no very gracious manner.

     "It's mum with me so long as I see you living on the straight," said
     the captain. "But, by the Lord! if you get off after this, it's
     another story! So good-night to you--and goodnight, Councillor."

     He left the bar-room; but not before he had created a local hero.
     McMurdo's deeds in far Chicago had been whispered before. He had put
     off all questions with a smile, as one who did not wish to have
     greatness thrust upon him. But now the thing was officially
     confirmed. The bar loafers crowded round him and shook him heartily
     by the hand. He was free of the community from that time on. He could
     drink hard and show little trace of it; but that evening, had his
     mate Scanlan not been at hand to lead him home, the feted hero would
     surely have spent his night under the bar.

     On a Saturday night McMurdo was introduced to the lodge. He had
     thought to pass in without ceremony as being an initiate of Chicago;
     but there were particular rites in Vermissa of which they were proud,
     and these had to be undergone by every postulant. The assembly met in
     a large room reserved for such purposes at the Union House. Some
     sixty members assembled at Vermissa; but that by no means represented
     the full strength of the organization, for there were several other
     lodges in the valley, and others across the mountains on each side,
     who exchanged members when any serious business was afoot, so that a
     crime might be done by men who were strangers to the locality.
     Altogether there were not less than five hundred scattered over the
     coal district.

     In the bare assembly room the men were gathered round a long table.
     At the side was a second one laden with bottles and glasses, on which
     some members of the company were already turning their eyes. McGinty
     sat at the head with a flat black velvet cap upon his shock of
     tangled black hair, and a coloured purple stole round his neck, so
     that he seemed to be a priest presiding over some diabolical ritual.
     To right and left of him were the higher lodge officials, the cruel,
     handsome face of Ted Baldwin among them. Each of these wore some
     scarf or medallion as emblem of his office.

     They were, for the most part, men of mature age; but the rest of the
     company consisted of young fellows from eighteen to twenty-five, the
     ready and capable agents who carried out the commands of their
     seniors. Among the older men were many whose features showed the
     tigerish, lawless souls within; but looking at the rank and file it
     was difficult to believe that these eager and open-faced young
     fellows were in very truth a dangerous gang of murderers, whose minds
     had suffered such complete moral perversion that they took a horrible
     pride in their proficiency at the business, and looked with deepest
     respect at the man who had the reputation of making what they called
     "a clean job."

     To their contorted natures it had become a spirited and chivalrous
     thing to volunteer for service against some man who had never injured
     them, and whom in many cases they had never seen in their lives. The
     crime committed, they quarrelled as to who had actually struck the
     fatal blow, and amused one another and the company by describing the
     cries and contortions of the murdered man.

     At first they had shown some secrecy in their arrangements; but at
     the time which this narrative describes their proceedings were
     extraordinarily open, for the repeated failures of the law had proved
     to them that, on the one hand, no one would dare to witness against
     them, and on the other they had an unlimited number of stanch
     witnesses upon whom they could call, and a well-filled treasure chest
     from which they could draw the funds to engage the best legal talent
     in the state. In ten long years of outrage there had been no single
     conviction, and the only danger that ever threatened the Scowrers lay
     in the victim himself--who, however outnumbered and taken by
     surprise, might and occasionally did leave his mark upon his
     assailants.

     McMurdo had been warned that some ordeal lay before him; but no one
     would tell him in what it consisted. He was led now into an outer
     room by two solemn brothers. Through the plank partition he could
     hear the murmur of many voices from the assembly within. Once or
     twice he caught the sound of his own name, and he knew that they were
     discussing his candidacy. Then there entered an inner guard with a
     green and gold sash across his chest.

     "The Bodymaster orders that he shall be trussed, blinded, and
     entered," said he.

     The three of them removed his coat, turned up the sleeve of his right
     arm, and finally passed a rope round above the elbows and made it
     fast. They next placed a thick black cap right over his head and the
     upper part of his face, so that he could see nothing. He was then led
     into the assembly hall.

     It was pitch dark and very oppressive under his hood. He heard the
     rustle and murmur of the people round him, and then the voice of
     McGinty sounded dull and distant through the covering of his ears.

     "John McMurdo," said the voice, "are you already a member of the
     Ancient Order of Freemen?"

     He bowed in assent.

     "Is your lodge No. 29, Chicago?"

     He bowed again.

     "Dark nights are unpleasant," said the voice.

     "Yes, for strangers to travel," he answered.

     "The clouds are heavy."

     "Yes, a storm is approaching."

     "Are the brethren satisfied?" asked the Bodymaster.

     There was a general murmur of assent.

     "We know, Brother, by your sign and by your countersign that you are
     indeed one of us," said McGinty. "We would have you know, however,
     that in this county and in other counties of these parts we have
     certain rites, and also certain duties of our own which call for good
     men. Are you ready to be tested?"

     "I am."

     "Are you of stout heart?"

     "I am."

     "Take a stride forward to prove it."

     As the words were said he felt two hard points in front of his eyes,
     pressing upon them so that it appeared as if he could not move
     forward without a danger of losing them. None the less, he nerved
     himself to step resolutely out, and as he did so the pressure melted
     away. There was a low murmur of applause.

     "He is of stout heart," said the voice. "Can you bear pain?"

     "As well as another," he answered.

     "Test him!"

     It was all he could do to keep himself from screaming out, for an
     agonizing pain shot through his forearm. He nearly fainted at the
     sudden shock of it; but he bit his lip and clenched his hands to hide
     his agony.

     "I can take more than that," said he.

     This time there was loud applause. A finer first appearance had never
     been made in the lodge. Hands clapped him on the back, and the hood
     was plucked from his head. He stood blinking and smiling amid the
     congratulations of the brothers.

     "One last word, Brother McMurdo," said McGinty. "You have already
     sworn the oath of secrecy and fidelity, and you are aware that the
     punishment for any breach of it is instant and inevitable death?"

     "I am," said McMurdo.

     "And you accept the rule of the Bodymaster for the time being under
     all circumstances?"

     "I do."

     "Then in the name of Lodge 341, Vermissa, I welcome you to its
     privileges and debates. You will put the liquor on the table, Brother
     Scanlan, and we will drink to our worthy brother."

     McMurdo's coat had been brought to him; but before putting it on he
     examined his right arm, which still smarted heavily. There on the
     flesh of the forearm was a circle with a triangle within it, deep and
     red, as the branding iron had left it. One or two of his neighbours
     pulled up their sleeves and showed their own lodge marks.

     "We've all had it," said one; "but not all as brave as you over it."

     "Tut! It was nothing," said he; but it burned and ached all the same.

     When the drinks which followed the ceremony of initiation had all
     been disposed of, the business of the lodge proceeded. McMurdo,
     accustomed only to the prosaic performances of Chicago, listened with
     open ears and more surprise than he ventured to show to what
     followed.

     "The first business on the agenda paper," said McGinty, "is to read
     the following letter from Division Master Windle of Merton County
     Lodge 249. He says:

     "Dear Sir:
     "There is a job to be done on Andrew Rae of Rae & Sturmash, coal
     owners near this place. You will remember that your lodge owes us a
     return, having had the service of two brethren in the matter of the
     patrolman last fall. You will send two good men, they will be taken
     charge of by Treasurer Higgins of this lodge, whose address you know.
     He will show them when to act and where. Yours in freedom,
     "J. W. Windle D. M. A. O. F.

     "Windle has never refused us when we have had occasion to ask for the
     loan of a man or two, and it is not for us to refuse him." McGinty
     paused and looked round the room with his dull, malevolent eyes. "Who
     will volunteer for the job?"

     Several young fellows held up their hands. The Bodymaster looked at
     them with an approving smile.

     "You'll do, Tiger Cormac. If you handle it as well as you did the
     last, you won't be wrong. And you, Wilson."

     "I've no pistol," said the volunteer, a mere boy in his teens.

     "It's your first, is it not? Well, you have to be blooded some time.
     It will be a great start for you. As to the pistol, you'll find it
     waiting for you, or I'm mistaken. If you report yourselves on Monday,
     it will be time enough. You'll get a great welcome when you return."

     "Any reward this time?" asked Cormac, a thick-set, dark-faced,
     brutal-looking young man, whose ferocity had earned him the nickname
     of "Tiger."

     "Never mind the reward. You just do it for the honour of the thing.
     Maybe when it is done there will be a few odd dollars at the bottom
     of the box."

     "What has the man done?" asked young Wilson.

     "Sure, it's not for the likes of you to ask what the man has done. He
     has been judged over there. That's no business of ours. All we have
     to do is to carry it out for them, same as they would for us.
     Speaking of that, two brothers from the Merton lodge are coming over
     to us next week to do some business in this quarter."

     "Who are they?" asked someone.

     "Faith, it is wiser not to ask. If you know nothing, you can testify
     nothing, and no trouble can come of it. But they are men who will
     make a clean job when they are about it."

     "And time, too!" cried Ted Baldwin. "Folk are gettin' out of hand in
     these parts. It was only last week that three of our men were turned
     off by Foreman Blaker. It's been owing him a long time, and he'll get
     it full and proper."

     "Get what?" McMurdo whispered to his neighbour.

     "The business end of a buckshot cartridge!" cried the man with a loud
     laugh. "What think you of our ways, Brother?"

     McMurdo's criminal soul seemed to have already absorbed the spirit of
     the vile association of which he was now a member. "I like it well,"
     said he. "'Tis a proper place for a lad of mettle."

     Several of those who sat around heard his words and applauded them.

     "What's that?" cried the black-maned Bodymaster from the end of the
     table.

     "'Tis our new brother, sir, who finds our ways to his taste."

     McMurdo rose to his feet for an instant. "I would say, Eminent
     Bodymaster, that if a man should be wanted I should take it as an
     honour to be chosen to help the lodge."

     There was great applause at this. It was felt that a new sun was
     pushing its rim above the horizon. To some of the elders it seemed
     that the progress was a little too rapid.

     "I would move," said the secretary, Harraway, a vulture-faced old
     graybeard who sat near the chairman, "that Brother McMurdo should
     wait until it is the good pleasure of the lodge to employ him."

     "Sure, that was what I meant; I'm in your hands," said McMurdo.

     "Your time will come, Brother," said the chairman. "We have marked
     you down as a willing man, and we believe that you will do good work
     in these parts. There is a small matter to-night in which you may
     take a hand if it so please you."

     "I will wait for something that is worth while."

     "You can come to-night, anyhow, and it will help you to know what we
     stand for in this community. I will make the announcement later.
     Meanwhile," he glanced at his agenda paper, "I have one or two more
     points to bring before the meeting. First of all, I will ask the
     treasurer as to our bank balance. There is the pension to Jim
     Carnaway's widow. He was struck down doing the work of the lodge, and
     it is for us to see that she is not the loser."

     "Jim was shot last month when they tried to kill Chester Wilcox of
     Marley Creek," McMurdo's neighbour informed him.

     "The funds are good at the moment," said the treasurer, with the
     bankbook in front of him. "The firms have been generous of late. Max
     Linder & Co. paid five hundred to be left alone. Walker Brothers sent
     in a hundred; but I took it on myself to return it and ask for five.
     If I do not hear by Wednesday, their winding gear may get out of
     order. We had to burn their breaker last year before they became
     reasonable. Then the West Section Coaling Company has paid its annual
     contribution. We have enough on hand to meet any obligations."

     "What about Archie Swindon?" asked a brother.

     "He has sold out and left the district. The old devil left a note for
     us to say that he had rather be a free crossing sweeper in New York
     than a large mine owner under the power of a ring of blackmailers. By
     Gar! it was as well that he made a break for it before the note
     reached us! I guess he won't show his face in this valley again."

     An elderly, clean-shaved man with a kindly face and a good brow rose
     from the end of the table which faced the chairman. "Mr. Treasurer,"
     he asked, "may I ask who has bought the property of this man that we
     have driven out of the district?"

     "Yes, Brother Morris. It has been bought by the State & Merton County
     Railroad Company."

     "And who bought the mines of Todman and of Lee that came into the
     market in the same way last year?"

     "The same company, Brother Morris."

     "And who bought the ironworks of Manson and of Shuman and of Van
     Deher and of Atwood, which have all been given up of late?"

     "They were all bought by the West Gilmerton General Mining Company."

     "I don't see, Brother Morris," said the chairman, "that it matters to
     us who buys them, since they can't carry them out of the district."

     "With all respect to you, Eminent Bodymaster, I think it may matter
     very much to us. This process has been going on now for ten long
     years. We are gradually driving all the small men out of trade. What
     is the result? We find in their places great companies like the
     Railroad or the General Iron, who have their directors in New York or
     Philadelphia, and care nothing for our threats. We can take it out of
     their local bosses, but it only means that others will be sent in
     their stead. And we are making it dangerous for ourselves. The small
     men could not harm us. They had not the money nor the power. So long
     as we did not squeeze them too dry, they would stay on under our
     power. But if these big companies find that we stand between them and
     their profits, they will spare no pains and no expense to hunt us
     down and bring us to court."

     There was a hush at these ominous words, and every face darkened as
     gloomy looks were exchanged. So omnipotent and unchallenged had they
     been that the very thought that there was possible retribution in the
     background had been banished from their minds. And yet the idea
     struck a chill to the most reckless of them.

     "It is my advice," the speaker continued, "that we go easier upon the
     small men. On the day that they have all been driven out the power of
     this society will have been broken."

     Unwelcome truths are not popular. There were angry cries as the
     speaker resumed his seat. McGinty rose with gloom upon his brow.

     "Brother Morris," said he, "you were always a croaker. So long as the
     members of this lodge stand together there is no power in the United
     States that can touch them. Sure, have we not tried it often enough
     in the law courts? I expect the big companies will find it easier to
     pay than to fight, same as the little companies do. And now,
     Brethren," McGinty took off his black velvet cap and his stole as he
     spoke, "this lodge has finished its business for the evening, save
     for one small matter which may be mentioned when we are parting. The
     time has now come for fraternal refreshment and for harmony."

     Strange indeed is human nature. Here were these men, to whom murder
     was familiar, who again and again had struck down the father of the
     family, some man against whom they had no personal feeling, without
     one thought of compunction or of compassion for his weeping wife or
     helpless children, and yet the tender or pathetic in music could move
     them to tears. McMurdo had a fine tenor voice, and if he had failed
     to gain the good will of the lodge before, it could no longer have
     been withheld after he had thrilled them with "I'm Sitting on the
     Stile, Mary," and "On the Banks of Allan Water."

     In his very first night the new recruit had made himself one of the
     most popular of the brethren, marked already for advancement and high
     office. There were other qualities needed, however, besides those of
     good fellowship, to make a worthy Freeman, and of these he was given
     an example before the evening was over. The whisky bottle had passed
     round many times, and the men were flushed and ripe for mischief when
     their Bodymaster rose once more to address them.

     "Boys," said he, "there's one man in this town that wants trimming
     up, and it's for you to see that he gets it. I'm speaking of James
     Stanger of the Herald. You've seen how he's been opening his mouth
     against us again?"

     There was a murmur of assent, with many a muttered oath. McGinty took
     a slip of paper from his waistcoat pocket.

                                 Law and Order!

     That's how he heads it.

                 "Reign of terror in the coal and iron district
     "Twelve years have now elapsed since the first assassinations which
     proved the existence of a criminal organization in our midst. From
     that day these outrages have never ceased, until now they have
     reached a pitch which makes us the opprobrium of the civilized world.
     Is it for such results as this that our great country welcomes to its
     bosom the alien who flies from the despotisms of Europe? Is it that
     they shall themselves become tyrants over the very men who have given
     them shelter, and that a state of terrorism and lawlessness should be
     established under the very shadow of the sacred folds of the starry
     Flag of Freedom which would raise horror in our minds if we read of
     it as existing under the most effete monarchy of the East? The men
     are known. The organization is patent and public. How long are we to
     endure it? Can we forever live--

     Sure, I've read enough of the slush!" cried the chairman, tossing the
     paper down upon the table. "That's what he says of us. The question
     I'm asking you is what shall we say to him?"

     "Kill him!" cried a dozen fierce voices.

     "I protest against that," said Brother Morris, the man of the good
     brow and shaved face. "I tell you, Brethren, that our hand is too
     heavy in this valley, and that there will come a point where in
     self-defense every man will unite to crush us out. James Stanger is
     an old man. He is respected in the township and the district. His
     paper stands for all that is solid in the valley. If that man is
     struck down, there will be a stir through this state that will only
     end with our destruction."

     "And how would they bring about our destruction, Mr. Standback?"
     cried McGinty. "Is it by the police? Sure, half of them are in our
     pay and half of them afraid of us. Or is it by the law courts and the
     judge? Haven't we tried that before now, and what ever came of it?"

     "There is a Judge Lynch that might try the case," said Brother
     Morris.

     A general shout of anger greeted the suggestion.

     "I have but to raise my finger," cried McGinty, "and I could put two
     hundred men into this town that would clear it out from end to end."
     Then suddenly raising his voice and bending his huge black brows into
     a terrible frown, "See here, Brother Morris, I have my eye on you,
     and have had for some time! You've no heart yourself, and you try to
     take the heart out of others. It will be an ill day for you, Brother
     Morris, when your own name comes on our agenda paper, and I'm
     thinking that it's just there that I ought to place it."

     Morris had turned deadly pale, and his knees seemed to give way under
     him as he fell back into his chair. He raised his glass in his
     trembling hand and drank before he could answer. "I apologize,
     Eminent Bodymaster, to you and to every brother in this lodge if I
     have said more than I should. I am a faithful member--you all know
     that--and it is my fear lest evil come to the lodge which makes me
     speak in anxious words. But I have greater trust in your judgment
     than in my own, Eminent Bodymaster, and I promise you that I will not
     offend again."

     The Bodymaster's scowl relaxed as he listened to the humble words.
     "Very good, Brother Morris. It's myself that would be sorry if it
     were needful to give you a lesson. But so long as I am in this chair
     we shall be a united lodge in word and in deed. And now, boys," he
     continued, looking round at the company, "I'll say this much, that if
     Stanger got his full deserts there would be more trouble than we need
     ask for. These editors hang together, and every journal in the state
     would be crying out for police and troops. But I guess you can give
     him a pretty severe warning. Will you fix it, Brother Baldwin?"

     "Sure!" said the young man eagerly.

     "How many will you take?"

     "Half a dozen, and two to guard the door. You'll come, Gower, and
     you, Mansel, and you, Scanlan, and the two Willabys."

     "I promised the new brother he should go," said the chairman.

     Ted Baldwin looked at McMurdo with eyes which showed that he had not
     forgotten nor forgiven. "Well, he can come if he wants," he said in a
     surly voice. "That's enough. The sooner we get to work the better."

     The company broke up with shouts and yells and snatches of drunken
     song. The bar was still crowded with revellers, and many of the
     brethren remained there. The little band who had been told off for
     duty passed out into the street, proceeding in twos and threes along
     the sidewalk so as not to provoke attention. It was a bitterly cold
     night, with a half-moon shining brilliantly in a frosty,
     star-spangled sky. The men stopped and gathered in a yard which faced
     a high building. The words "Vermissa Herald" were printed in gold
     lettering between the brightly lit windows. From within came the
     clanking of the printing press.

     "Here, you," said Baldwin to McMurdo, "you can stand below at the
     door and see that the road is kept open for us. Arthur Willaby can
     stay with you. You others come with me. Have no fears, boys; for we
     have a dozen witnesses that we are in the Union Bar at this very
     moment."

     It was nearly midnight, and the street was deserted save for one or
     two revellers upon their way home. The party crossed the road, and,
     pushing open the door of the newspaper office, Baldwin and his men
     rushed in and up the stair which faced them. McMurdo and another
     remained below. From the room above came a shout, a cry for help, and
     then the sound of trampling feet and of falling chairs. An instant
     later a gray-haired man rushed out on the landing.

     He was seized before he could get farther, and his spectacles came
     tinkling down to McMurdo's feet. There was a thud and a groan. He was
     on his face, and half a dozen sticks were clattering together as they
     fell upon him. He writhed, and his long, thin limbs quivered under
     the blows. The others ceased at last; but Baldwin, his cruel face set
     in an infernal smile, was hacking at the man's head, which he vainly
     endeavoured to defend with his arms. His white hair was dabbled with
     patches of blood. Baldwin was still stooping over his victim, putting
     in a short, vicious blow whenever he could see a part exposed, when
     McMurdo dashed up the stair and pushed him back.

     "You'll kill the man," said he. "Drop it!"

     Baldwin looked at him in amazement. "Curse you!" he cried. "Who are
     you to interfere--you that are new to the lodge? Stand back!" He
     raised his stick; but McMurdo had whipped his pistol out of his hip
     pocket.

     "Stand back yourself!" he cried. "I'll blow your face in if you lay a
     hand on me. As to the lodge, wasn't it the order of the Bodymaster
     that the man was not to be killed--and what are you doing but killing
     him?"

     "It's truth he says," remarked one of the men.

     "By Gar! you'd best hurry yourselves!" cried the man below. "The
     windows are all lighting up, and you'll have the whole town here
     inside of five minutes."

     There was indeed the sound of shouting in the street, and a little
     group of compositors and pressmen was forming in the hall below and
     nerving itself to action. Leaving the limp and motionless body of the
     editor at the head of the stair, the criminals rushed down and made
     their way swiftly along the street. Having reached the Union House,
     some of them mixed with the crowd in McGinty's saloon, whispering
     across the bar to the Boss that the job had been well carried
     through. Others, and among them McMurdo, broke away into side
     streets, and so by devious paths to their own homes.





          CHAPTER IV
          The Valley of Fear


     When McMurdo awoke next morning he had good reason to remember his
     initiation into the lodge. His head ached with the effect of the
     drink, and his arm, where he had been branded, was hot and swollen.
     Having his own peculiar source of income, he was irregular in his
     attendance at his work; so he had a late breakfast, and remained at
     home for the morning writing a long letter to a friend. Afterwards he
     read the Daily Herald. In a special column put in at the last moment
     he read:

            Outrage at the herald office -- Editor seriously injured

     It was a short account of the facts with which he was himself more
     familiar than the writer could have been. It ended with the
     statement:

     The matter is now in the hands of the police; but it can hardly be
     hoped that their exertions will be attended by any better results
     than in the past. Some of the men were recognized, and there is hope
     that a conviction may be obtained. The source of the outrage was, it
     need hardly be said, that infamous society which has held this
     community in bondage for so long a period, and against which the
     Herald has taken so uncompromising a stand. Mr. Stanger's many
     friends will rejoice to hear that, though he has been cruelly and
     brutally beaten, and though he has sustained severe injuries about
     the head, there is no immediate danger to his life.

     Below it stated that a guard of police, armed with Winchester rifles,
     had been requisitioned for the defense of the office.

     McMurdo had laid down the paper, and was lighting his pipe with a
     hand which was shaky from the excesses of the previous evening, when
     there was a knock outside, and his landlady brought to him a note
     which had just been handed in by a lad. It was unsigned, and ran
     thus:

     I should wish to speak to you, but would rather not do so in your
     house. You will find me beside the flagstaff upon Miller Hill. If you
     will come there now, I have something which it is important for you
     to hear and for me to say.

     McMurdo read the note twice with the utmost surprise; for he could
     not imagine what it meant or who was the author of it. Had it been in
     a feminine hand, he might have imagined that it was the beginning of
     one of those adventures which had been familiar enough in his past
     life. But it was the writing of a man, and of a well educated one,
     too. Finally, after some hesitation, he determined to see the matter
     through.

     Miller Hill is an ill-kept public park in the very centre of the
     town. In summer it is a favourite resort of the people; but in winter
     it is desolate enough. From the top of it one has a view not only of
     the whole straggling, grimy town, but of the winding valley beneath,
     with its scattered mines and factories blackening the snow on each
     side of it, and of the wooded and white-capped ranges flanking it.

     McMurdo strolled up the winding path hedged in with evergreens until
     he reached the deserted restaurant which forms the centre of summer
     gaiety. Beside it was a bare flagstaff, and underneath it a man, his
     hat drawn down and the collar of his overcoat turned up. When he
     turned his face McMurdo saw that it was Brother Morris, he who had
     incurred the anger of the Bodymaster the night before. The lodge sign
     was given and exchanged as they met.

     "I wanted to have a word with you, Mr. McMurdo," said the older man,
     speaking with a hesitation which showed that he was on delicate
     ground. "It was kind of you to come."

     "Why did you not put your name to the note?"

     "One has to be cautious, mister. One never knows in times like these
     how a thing may come back to one. One never knows either who to trust
     or who not to trust."

     "Surely one may trust brothers of the lodge."

     "No, no, not always," cried Morris with vehemence. "Whatever we say,
     even what we think, seems to go back to that man McGinty."

     "Look here!" said McMurdo sternly. "It was only last night, as you
     know well, that I swore good faith to our Bodymaster. Would you be
     asking me to break my oath?"

     "If that is the view you take," said Morris sadly, "I can only say
     that I am sorry I gave you the trouble to come and meet me. Things
     have come to a bad pass when two free citizens cannot speak their
     thoughts to each other."

     McMurdo, who had been watching his companion very narrowly, relaxed
     somewhat in his bearing. "Sure I spoke for myself only," said he. "I
     am a newcomer, as you know, and I am strange to it all. It is not for
     me to open my mouth, Mr. Morris, and if you think well to say
     anything to me I am here to hear it."

     "And to take it back to Boss McGinty!" said Morris bitterly.

     "Indeed, then, you do me injustice there," cried McMurdo. "For myself
     I am loyal to the lodge, and so I tell you straight; but I would be a
     poor creature if I were to repeat to any other what you might say to
     me in confidence. It will go no further than me; though I warn you
     that you may get neither help nor sympathy."

     "I have given up looking for either the one or the other," said
     Morris. "I may be putting my very life in your hands by what I say;
     but, bad as you are--and it seemed to me last night that you were
     shaping to be as bad as the worst--still you are new to it, and your
     conscience cannot yet be as hardened as theirs. That was why I
     thought to speak with you."

     "Well, what have you to say?"

     "If you give me away, may a curse be on you!"

     "Sure, I said I would not."

     "I would ask you, then, when you joined the Freeman's society in
     Chicago and swore vows of charity and fidelity, did ever it cross
     your mind that you might find it would lead you to crime?"

     "If you call it crime," McMurdo answered.

     "Call it crime!" cried Morris, his voice vibrating with passion. "You
     have seen little of it if you can call it anything else. Was it crime
     last night when a man old enough to be your father was beaten till
     the blood dripped from his white hairs? Was that crime--or what else
     would you call it?"

     "There are some would say it was war," said McMurdo, "a war of two
     classes with all in, so that each struck as best it could."

     "Well, did you think of such a thing when you joined the Freeman's
     society at Chicago?"

     "No, I'm bound to say I did not."

     "Nor did I when I joined it at Philadelphia. It was just a benefit
     club and a meeting place for one's fellows. Then I heard of this
     place--curse the hour that the name first fell upon my ears!--and I
     came to better myself! My God! to better myself! My wife and three
     children came with me. I started a dry goods store on Market Square,
     and I prospered well. The word had gone round that I was a Freeman,
     and I was forced to join the local lodge, same as you did last night.
     I've the badge of shame on my forearm and something worse branded on
     my heart. I found that I was under the orders of a black villain and
     caught in a meshwork of crime. What could I do? Every word I said to
     make things better was taken as treason, same as it was last night. I
     can't get away; for all I have in the world is in my store. If I
     leave the society, I know well that it means murder to me, and God
     knows what to my wife and children. Oh, man, it is awful--awful!" He
     put his hands to his face, and his body shook with convulsive sobs.

     McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "You were too soft for the job," said
     he. "You are the wrong sort for such work."

     "I had a conscience and a religion; but they made me a criminal among
     them. I was chosen for a job. If I backed down I knew well what would
     come to me. Maybe I'm a coward. Maybe it's the thought of my poor
     little woman and the children that makes me one. Anyhow I went. I
     guess it will haunt me forever.

     "It was a lonely house, twenty miles from here, over the range
     yonder. I was told off for the door, same as you were last night.
     They could not trust me with the job. The others went in. When they
     came out their hands were crimson to the wrists. As we turned away a
     child was screaming out of the house behind us. It was a boy of five
     who had seen his father murdered. I nearly fainted with the horror of
     it, and yet I had to keep a bold and smiling face; for well I knew
     that if I did not it would be out of my house that they would come
     next with their bloody hands and it would be my little Fred that
     would be screaming for his father.

     "But I was a criminal then, part sharer in a murder, lost forever in
     this world, and lost also in the next. I am a good Catholic; but the
     priest would have no word with me when he heard I was a Scowrer, and
     I am excommunicated from my faith. That's how it stands with me. And
     I see you going down the same road, and I ask you what the end is to
     be. Are you ready to be a cold-blooded murderer also, or can we do
     anything to stop it?"

     "What would you do?" asked McMurdo abruptly. "You would not inform?"

     "God forbid!" cried Morris. "Sure, the very thought would cost me my
     life."

     "That's well," said McMurdo. "I'm thinking that you are a weak man
     and that you make too much of the matter."

     "Too much! Wait till you have lived here longer. Look down the
     valley! See the cloud of a hundred chimneys that overshadows it! I
     tell you that the cloud of murder hangs thicker and lower than that
     over the heads of the people. It is the Valley of Fear, the Valley of
     Death. The terror is in the hearts of the people from the dusk to the
     dawn. Wait, young man, and you will learn for yourself."

     "Well, I'll let you know what I think when I have seen more," said
     McMurdo carelessly. "What is very clear is that you are not the man
     for the place, and that the sooner you sell out--if you only get a
     dime a dollar for what the business is worth--the better it will be
     for you. What you have said is safe with me; but, by Gar! if I
     thought you were an informer--"

     "No, no!" cried Morris piteously.

     "Well, let it rest at that. I'll bear what you have said in mind, and
     maybe some day I'll come back to it. I expect you meant kindly by
     speaking to me like this. Now I'll be getting home."

     "One word before you go," said Morris. "We may have been seen
     together. They may want to know what we have spoken about."

     "Ah! that's well thought of."

     "I offer you a clerkship in my store."

     "And I refuse it. That's our business. Well, so long, Brother Morris,
     and may you find things go better with you in the future."

     That same afternoon, as McMurdo sat smoking, lost in thought beside
     the stove of his sitting-room, the door swung open and its framework
     was filled with the huge figure of Boss McGinty. He passed the sign,
     and then seating himself opposite to the young man he looked at him
     steadily for some time, a look which was as steadily returned.

     "I'm not much of a visitor, Brother McMurdo," he said at last. "I
     guess I am too busy over the folk that visit me. But I thought I'd
     stretch a point and drop down to see you in your own house."

     "I'm proud to see you here, Councillor," McMurdo answered heartily,
     bringing his whisky bottle out of the cupboard. "It's an honour that
     I had not expected."

     "How's the arm?" asked the Boss.

     McMurdo made a wry face. "Well, I'm not forgetting it," he said; "but
     it's worth it."

     "Yes, it's worth it," the other answered, "to those that are loyal
     and go through with it and are a help to the lodge. What were you
     speaking to Brother Morris about on Miller Hill this morning?"

     The question came so suddenly that it was well that he had his answer
     prepared. He burst into a hearty laugh. "Morris didn't know I could
     earn a living here at home. He shan't know either; for he has got too
     much conscience for the likes of me. But he's a good-hearted old
     chap. It was his idea that I was at a loose end, and that he would do
     me a good turn by offering me a clerkship in a dry goods store."

     "Oh, that was it?"

     "Yes, that was it."

     "And you refused it?"

     "Sure. Couldn't I earn ten times as much in my own bedroom with four
     hours' work?"

     "That's so. But I wouldn't get about too much with Morris."

     "Why not?"

     "Well, I guess because I tell you not. That's enough for most folk in
     these parts."

     "It may be enough for most folk; but it ain't enough for me,
     Councillor," said McMurdo boldly. "If you are a judge of men, you'll
     know that."

     The swarthy giant glared at him, and his hairy paw closed for an
     instant round the glass as though he would hurl it at the head of his
     companion. Then he laughed in his loud, boisterous, insincere
     fashion.

     "You're a queer card, for sure," said he. "Well, if you want reasons,
     I'll give them. Did Morris say nothing to you against the lodge?"

     "No."

     "Nor against me?"

     "No."

     "Well, that's because he daren't trust you. But in his heart he is
     not a loyal brother. We know that well. So we watch him and we wait
     for the time to admonish him. I'm thinking that the time is drawing
     near. There's no room for scabby sheep in our pen. But if you keep
     company with a disloyal man, we might think that you were disloyal,
     too. See?"

     "There's no chance of my keeping company with him; for I dislike the
     man," McMurdo answered. "As to being disloyal, if it was any man but
     you he would not use the word to me twice."

     "Well, that's enough," said McGinty, draining off his glass. "I came
     down to give you a word in season, and you've had it."

     "I'd like to know," said McMurdo, "how you ever came to learn that I
     had spoken with Morris at all?"

     McGinty laughed. "It's my business to know what goes on in this
     township," said he. "I guess you'd best reckon on my hearing all that
     passes. Well, time's up, and I'll just say--"

     But his leavetaking was cut short in a very unexpected fashion. With
     a sudden crash the door flew open, and three frowning, intent faces
     glared in at them from under the peaks of police caps. McMurdo sprang
     to his feet and half drew his revolver; but his arm stopped midway as
     he became conscious that two Winchester rifles were levelled at his
     head. A man in uniform advanced into the room, a six-shooter in his
     hand. It was Captain Marvin, once of Chicago, and now of the Mine
     Constabulary. He shook his head with a half-smile at McMurdo.

     "I thought you'd be getting into trouble, Mr. Crooked McMurdo of
     Chicago," said he. "Can't keep out of it, can you? Take your hat and
     come along with us."

     "I guess you'll pay for this, Captain Marvin," said McGinty. "Who are
     you, I'd like to know, to break into a house in this fashion and
     molest honest, law-abiding men?"

     "You're standing out in this deal, Councillor McGinty," said the
     police captain. "We are not out after you, but after this man
     McMurdo. It is for you to help, not to hinder us in our duty,"

     "He is a friend of mine, and I'll answer for his conduct," said the
     Boss.

     "By all accounts, Mr. McGinty, you may have to answer for your own
     conduct some of these days," the captain answered. "This man McMurdo
     was a crook before ever he came here, and he's a crook still. Cover
     him, Patrolman, while I disarm him."

     "There's my pistol," said McMurdo coolly. "Maybe, Captain Marvin, if
     you and I were alone and face to face you would not take me so
     easily."

     "Where's your warrant?" asked McGinty. "By Gar! a man might as well
     live in Russia as in Vermissa while folk like you are running the
     police. It's a capitalist outrage, and you'll hear more of it, I
     reckon."

     "You do what you think is your duty the best way you can, Councillor.
     We'll look after ours."

     "What am I accused of?" asked McMurdo.

     "Of being concerned in the beating of old Editor Stanger at the
     Herald office. It wasn't your fault that it isn't a murder charge."

     "Well, if that's all you have against him," cried McGinty with a
     laugh, "you can save yourself a deal of trouble by dropping it right
     now. This man was with me in my saloon playing poker up to midnight,
     and I can bring a dozen to prove it."

     "That's your affair, and I guess you can settle it in court
     to-morrow. Meanwhile, come on, McMurdo, and come quietly if you don't
     want a gun across your head. You stand wide, Mr. McGinty; for I warn
     you I will stand no resistance when I am on duty!"

     So determined was the appearance of the captain that both McMurdo and
     his boss were forced to accept the situation. The latter managed to
     have a few whispered words with the prisoner before they parted.

     "What about--" he jerked his thumb upward to signify the coining
     plant.

     "All right," whispered McMurdo, who had devised a safe hiding place
     under the floor.

     "I'll bid you good-bye," said the Boss, shaking hands. "I'll see
     Reilly the lawyer and take the defense upon myself. Take my word for
     it that they won't be able to hold you."

     "I wouldn't bet on that. Guard the prisoner, you two, and shoot him
     if he tries any games. I'll search the house before I leave."

     He did so; but apparently found no trace of the concealed plant. When
     he had descended he and his men escorted McMurdo to headquarters.
     Darkness had fallen, and a keen blizzard was blowing so that the
     streets were nearly deserted; but a few loiterers followed the group,
     and emboldened by invisibility shouted imprecations at the prisoner.

     "Lynch the cursed Scowrer!" they cried. "Lynch him!" They laughed and
     jeered as he was pushed into the police station. After a short,
     formal examination from the inspector in charge he was put into the
     common cell. Here he found Baldwin and three other criminals of the
     night before, all arrested that afternoon and waiting their trial
     next morning.

     But even within this inner fortress of the law the long arm of the
     Freemen was able to extend. Late at night there came a jailer with a
     straw bundle for their bedding, out of which he extracted two bottles
     of whisky, some glasses, and a pack of cards. They spent a hilarious
     night, without an anxious thought as to the ordeal of the morning.

     Nor had they cause, as the result was to show. The magistrate could
     not possibly, on the evidence, have held them for a higher court. On
     the one hand the compositors and pressmen were forced to admit that
     the light was uncertain, that they were themselves much perturbed,
     and that it was difficult for them to swear to the identity of the
     assailants; although they believed that the accused were among them.
     Cross examined by the clever attorney who had been engaged by
     McGinty, they were even more nebulous in their evidence.

     The injured man had already deposed that he was so taken by surprise
     by the suddenness of the attack that he could state nothing beyond
     the fact that the first man who struck him wore a moustache. He added
     that he knew them to be Scowrers, since no one else in the community
     could possibly have any enmity to him, and he had long been
     threatened on account of his outspoken editorials. On the other hand,
     it was clearly shown by the united and unfaltering evidence of six
     citizens, including that high municipal official, Councillor McGinty,
     that the men had been at a card party at the Union House until an
     hour very much later than the commission of the outrage.

     Needless to say that they were discharged with something very near to
     an apology from the bench for the inconvenience to which they had
     been put, together with an implied censure of Captain Marvin and the
     police for their officious zeal.

     The verdict was greeted with loud applause by a court in which
     McMurdo saw many familiar faces. Brothers of the lodge smiled and
     waved. But there were others who sat with compressed lips and
     brooding eyes as the men filed out of the dock. One of them, a
     little, dark-bearded, resolute fellow, put the thoughts of himself
     and comrades into words as the ex-prisoners passed him.

     "You damned murderers!" he said. "We'll fix you yet!"





          CHAPTER V
          The Darkest Hour


     If anything had been needed to give an impetus to Jack McMurdo's
     popularity among his fellows it would have been his arrest and
     acquittal. That a man on the very night of joining the lodge should
     have done something which brought him before the magistrate was a new
     record in the annals of the society. Already he had earned the
     reputation of a good boon companion, a cheery reveller, and withal a
     man of high temper, who would not take an insult even from the
     all-powerful Boss himself. But in addition to this he impressed his
     comrades with the idea that among them all there was not one whose
     brain was so ready to devise a bloodthirsty scheme, or whose hand
     would be more capable of carrying it out. "He'll be the boy for the
     clean job," said the oldsters to one another, and waited their time
     until they could set him to his work.

     McGinty had instruments enough already; but he recognized that this
     was a supremely able one. He felt like a man holding a fierce
     bloodhound in leash. There were curs to do the smaller work; but some
     day he would slip this creature upon its prey. A few members of the
     lodge, Ted Baldwin among them, resented the rapid rise of the
     stranger and hated him for it; but they kept clear of him, for he was
     as ready to fight as to laugh.

     But if he gained favour with his fellows, there was another quarter,
     one which had become even more vital to him, in which he lost it.
     Ettie Shafter's father would have nothing more to do with him, nor
     would he allow him to enter the house. Ettie herself was too deeply
     in love to give him up altogether, and yet her own good sense warned
     her of what would come from a marriage with a man who was regarded as
     a criminal.

     One morning after a sleepless night she determined to see him,
     possibly for the last time, and make one strong endeavour to draw him
     from those evil influences which were sucking him down. She went to
     his house, as he had often begged her to do, and made her way into
     the room which he used as his sitting-room. He was seated at a table,
     with his back turned and a letter in front of him. A sudden spirit of
     girlish mischief came over her--she was still only nineteen. He had
     not heard her when she pushed open the door. Now she tiptoed forward
     and laid her hand lightly upon his bended shoulders.

     If she had expected to startle him, she certainly succeeded; but only
     in turn to be startled herself. With a tiger spring he turned on her,
     and his right hand was feeling for her throat. At the same instant
     with the other hand he crumpled up the paper that lay before him. For
     an instant he stood glaring. Then astonishment and joy took the place
     of the ferocity which had convulsed his features--a ferocity which
     had sent her shrinking back in horror as from something which had
     never before intruded into her gentle life.

     "It's you!" said he, mopping his brow. "And to think that you should
     come to me, heart of my heart, and I should find nothing better to do
     than to want to strangle you! Come then, darling," and he held out
     his arms, "let me make it up to you."

     But she had not recovered from that sudden glimpse of guilty fear
     which she had read in the man's face. All her woman's instinct told
     her that it was not the mere fright of a man who is startled.
     Guilt--that was it--guilt and fear!

     "What's come over you, Jack?" she cried. "Why were you so scared of
     me? Oh, Jack, if your conscience was at ease, you would not have
     looked at me like that!"

     "Sure, I was thinking of other things, and when you came tripping so
     lightly on those fairy feet of yours--"

     "No, no, it was more than that, Jack." Then a sudden suspicion seized
     her. "Let me see that letter you were writing."

     "Ah, Ettie, I couldn't do that."

     Her suspicions became certainties. "It's to another woman," she
     cried. "I know it! Why else should you hold it from me? Was it to
     your wife that you were writing? How am I to know that you are not a
     married man--you, a stranger, that nobody knows?"

     "I am not married, Ettie. See now, I swear it! You're the only one
     woman on earth to me. By the cross of Christ I swear it!"

     He was so white with passionate earnestness that she could not but
     believe him.

     "Well, then," she cried, "why will you not show me the letter?"

     "I'll tell you, acushla," said he. "I'm under oath not to show it,
     and just as I wouldn't break my word to you so I would keep it to
     those who hold my promise. It's the business of the lodge, and even
     to you it's secret. And if I was scared when a hand fell on me, can't
     you understand it when it might have been the hand of a detective?"

     She felt that he was telling the truth. He gathered her into his arms
     and kissed away her fears and doubts.

     "Sit here by me, then. It's a queer throne for such a queen; but it's
     the best your poor lover can find. He'll do better for you some of
     these days, I'm thinking. Now your mind is easy once again, is it
     not?"

     "How can it ever be at ease, Jack, when I know that you are a
     criminal among criminals, when I never know the day that I may hear
     you are in court for murder? 'McMurdo the Scowrer,' that's what one
     of our boarders called you yesterday. It went through my heart like a
     knife."

     "Sure, hard words break no bones."

     "But they were true."

     "Well, dear, it's not so bad as you think. We are but poor men that
     are trying in our own way to get our rights."

     Ettie threw her arms round her lover's neck. "Give it up, Jack! For
     my sake, for God's sake, give it up! It was to ask you that I came
     here to-day. Oh, Jack, see--I beg it of you on my bended knees!
     Kneeling here before you I implore you to give it up!"

     He raised her and soothed her with her head against his breast.

     "Sure, my darlin', you don't know what it is you are asking. How
     could I give it up when it would be to break my oath and to desert my
     comrades? If you could see how things stand with me you could never
     ask it of me. Besides, if I wanted to, how could I do it? You don't
     suppose that the lodge would let a man go free with all its secrets?"

     "I've thought of that, Jack. I've planned it all. Father has saved
     some money. He is weary of this place where the fear of these people
     darkens our lives. He is ready to go. We would fly together to
     Philadelphia or New York, where we would be safe from them."

     McMurdo laughed. "The lodge has a long arm. Do you think it could not
     stretch from here to Philadelphia or New York?"

     "Well, then, to the West, or to England, or to Germany, where father
     came from--anywhere to get away from this Valley of Fear!"

     McMurdo thought of old Brother Morris. "Sure, it is the second time I
     have heard the valley so named," said he. "The shadow does indeed
     seem to lie heavy on some of you."

     "It darkens every moment of our lives. Do you suppose that Ted
     Baldwin has ever forgiven us? If it were not that he fears you, what
     do you suppose our chances would be? If you saw the look in those
     dark, hungry eyes of his when they fall on me!"

     "By Gar! I'd teach him better manners if I caught him at it! But see
     here, little girl. I can't leave here. I can't--take that from me
     once and for all. But if you will leave me to find my own way, I will
     try to prepare a way of getting honourably out of it."

     "There is no honour in such a matter."

     "Well, well, it's just how you look at it. But if you'll give me six
     months, I'll work it so that I can leave without being ashamed to
     look others in the face."

     The girl laughed with joy. "Six months!" she cried. "Is it a
     promise?"

     "Well, it may be seven or eight. But within a year at the furthest we
     will leave the valley behind us."

     It was the most that Ettie could obtain, and yet it was something.
     There was this distant light to illuminate the gloom of the immediate
     future. She returned to her father's house more light-hearted than
     she had ever been since Jack McMurdo had come into her life.

     It might be thought that as a member, all the doings of the society
     would be told to him; but he was soon to discover that the
     organization was wider and more complex than the simple lodge. Even
     Boss McGinty was ignorant as to many things; for there was an
     official named the County Delegate, living at Hobson's Patch farther
     down the line, who had power over several different lodges which he
     wielded in a sudden and arbitrary way. Only once did McMurdo see him,
     a sly, little gray-haired rat of a man, with a slinking gait and a
     sidelong glance which was charged with malice. Evans Pott was his
     name, and even the great Boss of Vermissa felt towards him something
     of the repulsion and fear which the huge Danton may have felt for the
     puny but dangerous Robespierre.

     One day Scanlan, who was McMurdo's fellow boarder, received a note
     from McGinty inclosing one from Evans Pott, which informed him that
     he was sending over two good men, Lawler and Andrews, who had
     instructions to act in the neighbourhood; though it was best for the
     cause that no particulars as to their objects should be given. Would
     the Bodymaster see to it that suitable arrangements be made for their
     lodgings and comfort until the time for action should arrive? McGinty
     added that it was impossible for anyone to remain secret at the Union
     House, and that, therefore, he would be obliged if McMurdo and
     Scanlan would put the strangers up for a few days in their boarding
     house.

     The same evening the two men arrived, each carrying his gripsack.
     Lawler was an elderly man, shrewd, silent, and self-contained, clad
     in an old black frock coat, which with his soft felt hat and ragged,
     grizzled beard gave him a general resemblance to an itinerant
     preacher. His companion Andrews was little more than a boy,
     frank-faced and cheerful, with the breezy manner of one who is out
     for a holiday and means to enjoy every minute of it. Both men were
     total abstainers, and behaved in all ways as exemplary members of the
     society, with the one simple exception that they were assassins who
     had often proved themselves to be most capable instruments for this
     association of murder. Lawler had already carried out fourteen
     commissions of the kind, and Andrews three.

     They were, as McMurdo found, quite ready to converse about their
     deeds in the past, which they recounted with the half-bashful pride
     of men who had done good and unselfish service for the community.
     They were reticent, however, as to the immediate job in hand.

     "They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink," Lawler
     explained. "They can count on us saying no more than we should. You
     must not take it amiss, but it is the orders of the County Delegate
     that we obey."

     "Sure, we are all in it together," said Scanlan, McMurdo's mate, as
     the four sat together at supper.

     "That's true enough, and we'll talk till the cows come home of the
     killing of Charlie Williams or of Simon Bird, or any other job in the
     past. But till the work is done we say nothing."

     "There are half a dozen about here that I have a word to say to,"
     said McMurdo, with an oath. "I suppose it isn't Jack Knox of Ironhill
     that you are after. I'd go some way to see him get his deserts."

     "No, it's not him yet."

     "Or Herman Strauss?"

     "No, nor him either."

     "Well, if you won't tell us we can't make you; but I'd be glad to
     know."

     Lawler smiled and shook his head. He was not to be drawn.

     In spite of the reticence of their guests, Scanlan and McMurdo were
     quite determined to be present at what they called "the fun." When,
     therefore, at an early hour one morning McMurdo heard them creeping
     down the stairs he awakened Scanlan, and the two hurried on their
     clothes. When they were dressed they found that the others had stolen
     out, leaving the door open behind them. It was not yet dawn, and by
     the light of the lamps they could see the two men some distance down
     the street. They followed them warily, treading noiselessly in the
     deep snow.

     The boarding house was near the edge of the town, and soon they were
     at the crossroads which is beyond its boundary. Here three men were
     waiting, with whom Lawler and Andrews held a short, eager
     conversation. Then they all moved on together. It was clearly some
     notable job which needed numbers. At this point there are several
     trails which lead to various mines. The strangers took that which led
     to the Crow Hill, a huge business which was in strong hands which had
     been able, thanks to their energetic and fearless New England
     manager, Josiah H. Dunn, to keep some order and discipline during the
     long reign of terror.

     Day was breaking now, and a line of workmen were slowly making their
     way, singly and in groups, along the blackened path.

     McMurdo and Scanlan strolled on with the others, keeping in sight of
     the men whom they followed. A thick mist lay over them, and from the
     heart of it there came the sudden scream of a steam whistle. It was
     the ten-minute signal before the cages descended and the day's labour
     began.

     When they reached the open space round the mine shaft there were a
     hundred miners waiting, stamping their feet and blowing on their
     fingers; for it was bitterly cold. The strangers stood in a little
     group under the shadow of the engine house. Scanlan and McMurdo
     climbed a heap of slag from which the whole scene lay before them.
     They saw the mine engineer, a great bearded Scotchman named Menzies,
     come out of the engine house and blow his whistle for the cages to be
     lowered.

     At the same instant a tall, loose-framed young man with a
     clean-shaved, earnest face advanced eagerly towards the pit head. As
     he came forward his eyes fell upon the group, silent and motionless,
     under the engine house. The men had drawn down their hats and turned
     up their collars to screen their faces. For a moment the presentiment
     of Death laid its cold hand upon the manager's heart. At the next he
     had shaken it off and saw only his duty towards intrusive strangers.

     "Who are you?" he asked as he advanced. "What are you loitering there
     for?"

     There was no answer; but the lad Andrews stepped forward and shot him
     in the stomach. The hundred waiting miners stood as motionless and
     helpless as if they were paralyzed. The manager clapped his two hands
     to the wound and doubled himself up. Then he staggered away; but
     another of the assassins fired, and he went down sidewise, kicking
     and clawing among a heap of clinkers. Menzies, the Scotchman, gave a
     roar of rage at the sight and rushed with an iron spanner at the
     murderers; but was met by two balls in the face which dropped him
     dead at their very feet.

     There was a surge forward of some of the miners, and an inarticulate
     cry of pity and of anger; but a couple of the strangers emptied their
     six-shooters over the heads of the crowd, and they broke and
     scattered, some of them rushing wildly back to their homes in
     Vermissa.

     When a few of the bravest had rallied, and there was a return to the
     mine, the murderous gang had vanished in the mists of morning,
     without a single witness being able to swear to the identity of these
     men who in front of a hundred spectators had wrought this double
     crime.

     Scanlan and McMurdo made their way back; Scanlan somewhat subdued,
     for it was the first murder job that he had seen with his own eyes,
     and it appeared less funny than he had been led to believe. The
     horrible screams of the dead manager's wife pursued them as they
     hurried to the town. McMurdo was absorbed and silent; but he showed
     no sympathy for the weakening of his companion.

     "Sure, it is like a war," he repeated. "What is it but a war between
     us and them, and we hit back where we best can."

     There was high revel in the lodge room at the Union House that night,
     not only over the killing of the manager and engineer of the Crow
     Hill mine, which would bring this organization into line with the
     other blackmailed and terror-stricken companies of the district, but
     also over a distant triumph which had been wrought by the hands of
     the lodge itself.

     It would appear that when the County Delegate had sent over five good
     men to strike a blow in Vermissa, he had demanded that in return
     three Vermissa men should be secretly selected and sent across to
     kill William Hales of Stake Royal, one of the best known and most
     popular mine owners in the Gilmerton district, a man who was believed
     not to have an enemy in the world; for he was in all ways a model
     employer. He had insisted, however, upon efficiency in the work, and
     had, therefore, paid off certain drunken and idle employees who were
     members of the all-powerful society. Coffin notices hung outside his
     door had not weakened his resolution, and so in a free, civilized
     country he found himself condemned to death.

     The execution had now been duly carried out. Ted Baldwin, who
     sprawled now in the seat of honour beside the Bodymaster, had been
     chief of the party. His flushed face and glazed, blood-shot eyes told
     of sleeplessness and drink. He and his two comrades had spent the
     night before among the mountains. They were unkempt and
     weather-stained. But no heroes, returning from a forlorn hope, could
     have had a warmer welcome from their comrades.

     The story was told and retold amid cries of delight and shouts of
     laughter. They had waited for their man as he drove home at
     nightfall, taking their station at the top of a steep hill, where his
     horse must be at a walk. He was so furred to keep out the cold that
     he could not lay his hand on his pistol. They had pulled him out and
     shot him again and again. He had screamed for mercy. The screams were
     repeated for the amusement of the lodge.

     "Let's hear again how he squealed," they cried.

     None of them knew the man; but there is eternal drama in a killing,
     and they had shown the Scowrers of Gilmerton that the Vermissa men
     were to be relied upon.

     There had been one contretemps; for a man and his wife had driven up
     while they were still emptying their revolvers into the silent body.
     It had been suggested that they should shoot them both; but they were
     harmless folk who were not connected with the mines, so they were
     sternly bidden to drive on and keep silent, lest a worse thing befall
     them. And so the blood-mottled figure had been left as a warning to
     all such hard-hearted employers, and the three noble avengers had
     hurried off into the mountains where unbroken nature comes down to
     the very edge of the furnaces and the slag heaps. Here they were,
     safe and sound, their work well done, and the plaudits of their
     companions in their ears.

     It had been a great day for the Scowrers. The shadow had fallen even
     darker over the valley. But as the wise general chooses the moment of
     victory in which to redouble his efforts, so that his foes may have
     no time to steady themselves after disaster, so Boss McGinty, looking
     out upon the scene of his operations with his brooding and malicious
     eyes, had devised a new attack upon those who opposed him. That very
     night, as the half-drunken company broke up, he touched McMurdo on
     the arm and led him aside into that inner room where they had their
     first interview.

     "See here, my lad," said he, "I've got a job that's worthy of you at
     last. You'll have the doing of it in your own hands."

     "Proud I am to hear it," McMurdo answered.

     "You can take two men with you--Manders and Reilly. They have been
     warned for service. We'll never be right in this district until
     Chester Wilcox has been settled, and you'll have the thanks of every
     lodge in the coal fields if you can down him."

     "I'll do my best, anyhow. Who is he, and where shall I find him?"

     McGinty took his eternal half-chewed, half-smoked cigar from the
     corner of his mouth, and proceeded to draw a rough diagram on a page
     torn from his notebook.

     "He's the chief foreman of the Iron Dike Company. He's a hard
     citizen, an old colour sergeant of the war, all scars and grizzle.
     We've had two tries at him; but had no luck, and Jim Carnaway lost
     his life over it. Now it's for you to take it over. That's the
     house--all alone at the Iron Dike crossroad, same as you see here on
     the map--without another within earshot. It's no good by day. He's
     armed and shoots quick and straight, with no questions asked. But at
     night--well, there he is with his wife, three children, and a hired
     help. You can't pick or choose. It's all or none. If you could get a
     bag of blasting powder at the front door with a slow match to it--"

     "What's the man done?"

     "Didn't I tell you he shot Jim Carnaway?"

     "Why did he shoot him?"

     "What in thunder has that to do with you? Carnaway was about his
     house at night, and he shot him. That's enough for me and you. You've
     got to settle the thing right."

     "There's these two women and the children. Do they go up too?"

     "They have to--else how can we get him?"

     "It seems hard on them; for they've done nothing."

     "What sort of fool's talk is this? Do you back out?"

     "Easy, Councillor, easy! What have I ever said or done that you
     should think I would be after standing back from an order of the
     Bodymaster of my own lodge? If it's right or if it's wrong, it's for
     you to decide."

     "You'll do it, then?"

     "Of course I will do it."

     "When?"

     "Well, you had best give me a night or two that I may see the house
     and make my plans. Then--"

     "Very good," said McGinty, shaking him by the hand. "I leave it with
     you. It will be a great day when you bring us the news. It's just the
     last stroke that will bring them all to their knees."

     McMurdo thought long and deeply over the commission which had been so
     suddenly placed in his hands. The isolated house in which Chester
     Wilcox lived was about five miles off in an adjacent valley. That
     very night he started off all alone to prepare for the attempt. It
     was daylight before he returned from his reconnaissance. Next day he
     interviewed his two subordinates, Manders and Reilly, reckless
     youngsters who were as elated as if it were a deer-hunt.

     Two nights later they met outside the town, all three armed, and one
     of them carrying a sack stuffed with the powder which was used in the
     quarries. It was two in the morning before they came to the lonely
     house. The night was a windy one, with broken clouds drifting swiftly
     across the face of a three-quarter moon. They had been warned to be
     on their guard against bloodhounds; so they moved forward cautiously,
     with their pistols cocked in their hands. But there was no sound save
     the howling of the wind, and no movement but the swaying branches
     above them.

     McMurdo listened at the door of the lonely house; but all was still
     within. Then he leaned the powder bag against it, ripped a hole in it
     with his knife, and attached the fuse. When it was well alight he and
     his two companions took to their heels, and were some distance off,
     safe and snug in a sheltering ditch, before the shattering roar of
     the explosion, with the low, deep rumble of the collapsing building,
     told them that their work was done. No cleaner job had ever been
     carried out in the bloodstained annals of the society.

     But alas that work so well organized and boldly carried out should
     all have gone for nothing! Warned by the fate of the various victims,
     and knowing that he was marked down for destruction, Chester Wilcox
     had moved himself and his family only the day before to some safer
     and less known quarters, where a guard of police should watch over
     them. It was an empty house which had been torn down by the
     gunpowder, and the grim old colour sergeant of the war was still
     teaching discipline to the miners of Iron Dike.

     "Leave him to me," said McMurdo. "He's my man, and I'll get him sure
     if I have to wait a year for him."

     A vote of thanks and confidence was passed in full lodge, and so for
     the time the matter ended. When a few weeks later it was reported in
     the papers that Wilcox had been shot at from an ambuscade, it was an
     open secret that McMurdo was still at work upon his unfinished job.

     Such were the methods of the Society of Freemen, and such were the
     deeds of the Scowrers by which they spread their rule of fear over
     the great and rich district which was for so long a period haunted by
     their terrible presence. Why should these pages be stained by further
     crimes? Have I not said enough to show the men and their methods?

     These deeds are written in history, and there are records wherein one
     may read the details of them. There one may learn of the shooting of
     Policemen Hunt and Evans because they had ventured to arrest two
     members of the society--a double outrage planned at the Vermissa
     lodge and carried out in cold blood upon two helpless and disarmed
     men. There also one may read of the shooting of Mrs. Larbey when she
     was nursing her husband, who had been beaten almost to death by
     orders of Boss McGinty. The killing of the elder Jenkins, shortly
     followed by that of his brother, the mutilation of James Murdoch, the
     blowing up of the Staphouse family, and the murder of the Stendals
     all followed hard upon one another in the same terrible winter.

     Darkly the shadow lay upon the Valley of Fear. The spring had come
     with running brooks and blossoming trees. There was hope for all
     Nature bound so long in an iron grip; but nowhere was there any hope
     for the men and women who lived under the yoke of the terror. Never
     had the cloud above them been so dark and hopeless as in the early
     summer of the year 1875.





          CHAPTER VI
          Danger


     It was the height of the reign of terror. McMurdo, who had already
     been appointed Inner Deacon, with every prospect of some day
     succeeding McGinty as Bodymaster, was now so necessary to the
     councils of his comrades that nothing was done without his help and
     advice. The more popular he became, however, with the Freemen, the
     blacker were the scowls which greeted him as he passed along the
     streets of Vermissa. In spite of their terror the citizens were
     taking heart to band themselves together against their oppressors.
     Rumours had reached the lodge of secret gatherings in the Herald
     office and of distribution of firearms among the law-abiding people.
     But McGinty and his men were undisturbed by such reports. They were
     numerous, resolute, and well armed. Their opponents were scattered
     and powerless. It would all end, as it had done in the past, in
     aimless talk and possibly in impotent arrests. So said McGinty,
     McMurdo, and all the bolder spirits.

     It was a Saturday evening in May. Saturday was always the lodge
     night, and McMurdo was leaving his house to attend it when Morris,
     the weaker brother of the order, came to see him. His brow was
     creased with care, and his kindly face was drawn and haggard.

     "Can I speak with you freely, Mr. McMurdo?"

     "Sure."

     "I can't forget that I spoke my heart to you once, and that you kept
     it to yourself, even though the Boss himself came to ask you about
     it."

     "What else could I do if you trusted me? It wasn't that I agreed with
     what you said."

     "I know that well. But you are the one that I can speak to and be
     safe. I've a secret here," he put his hand to his breast, "and it is
     just burning the life out of me. I wish it had come to any one of you
     but me. If I tell it, it will mean murder, for sure. If I don't, it
     may bring the end of us all. God help me, but I am near out of my
     wits over it!"

     McMurdo looked at the man earnestly. He was trembling in every limb.
     He poured some whisky into a glass and handed it to him. "That's the
     physic for the likes of you," said he. "Now let me hear of it."

     Morris drank, and his white face took a tinge of colour. "I can tell
     it to you all in one sentence," said he. "There's a detective on our
     trail."

     McMurdo stared at him in astonishment. "Why, man, you're crazy," he
     said. "Isn't the place full of police and detectives and what harm
     did they ever do us?"

     "No, no, it's no man of the district. As you say, we know them, and
     it is little that they can do. But you've heard of Pinkerton's?"

     "I've read of some folk of that name."

     "Well, you can take it from me you've no show when they are on your
     trail. It's not a take-it-or-miss-it government concern. It's a dead
     earnest business proposition that's out for results and keeps out
     till by hook or crook it gets them. If a Pinkerton man is deep in
     this business, we are all destroyed."

     "We must kill him."

     "Ah, it's the first thought that came to you! So it will be up at the
     lodge. Didn't I say to you that it would end in murder?"

     "Sure, what is murder? Isn't it common enough in these parts?"

     "It is, indeed; but it's not for me to point out the man that is to
     be murdered. I'd never rest easy again. And yet it's our own necks
     that may be at stake. In God's name what shall I do?" He rocked to
     and fro in his agony of indecision.

     But his words had moved McMurdo deeply. It was easy to see that he
     shared the other's opinion as to the danger, and the need for meeting
     it. He gripped Morris's shoulder and shook him in his earnestness.

     "See here, man," he cried, and he almost screeched the words in his
     excitement, "you won't gain anything by sitting keening like an old
     wife at a wake. Let's have the facts. Who is the fellow? Where is he?
     How did you hear of him? Why did you come to me?"

     "I came to you; for you are the one man that would advise me. I told
     you that I had a store in the East before I came here. I left good
     friends behind me, and one of them is in the telegraph service.
     Here's a letter that I had from him yesterday. It's this part from
     the top of the page. You can read it yourself."

     This was what McMurdo read:

     How are the Scowrers getting on in your parts? We read plenty of them
     in the papers. Between you and me I expect to hear news from you
     before long. Five big corporations and the two railroads have taken
     the thing up in dead earnest. They mean it, and you can bet they'll
     get there! They are right deep down into it. Pinkerton has taken hold
     under their orders, and his best man, Birdy Edwards, is operating.
     The thing has got to be stopped right now.

     "Now read the postscript."

     Of course, what I give you is what I learned in business; so it goes
     no further. It's a queer cipher that you handle by the yard every day
     and can get no meaning from.

     McMurdo sat in silence for some time, with the letter in his listless
     hands. The mist had lifted for a moment, and there was the abyss
     before him.

     "Does anyone else know of this?" he asked.

     "I have told no one else."

     "But this man--your friend--has he any other person that he would be
     likely to write to?"

     "Well, I dare say he knows one or two more."

     "Of the lodge?"

     "It's likely enough."

     "I was asking because it is likely that he may have given some
     description of this fellow Birdy Edwards--then we could get on his
     trail."

     "Well, it's possible. But I should not think he knew him. He is just
     telling me the news that came to him by way of business. How would he
     know this Pinkerton man?"

     McMurdo gave a violent start.

     "By Gar!" he cried, "I've got him. What a fool I was not to know it.
     Lord! but we're in luck! We will fix him before he can do any harm.
     See here, Morris, will you leave this thing in my hands?"

     "Sure, if you will only take it off mine."

     "I'll do that. You can stand right back and let me run it. Even your
     name need not be mentioned. I'll take it all on myself, as if it were
     to me that this letter has come. Will that content you?"

     "It's just what I would ask."

     "Then leave it at that and keep your head shut. Now I'll get down to
     the lodge, and we'll soon make old man Pinkerton sorry for himself."

     "You wouldn't kill this man?"

     "The less you know, Friend Morris, the easier your conscience will
     be, and the better you will sleep. Ask no questions, and let these
     things settle themselves. I have hold of it now."

     Morris shook his head sadly as he left. "I feel that his blood is on
     my hands," he groaned.

     "Self-protection is no murder, anyhow," said McMurdo, smiling grimly.
     "It's him or us. I guess this man would destroy us all if we left him
     long in the valley. Why, Brother Morris, we'll have to elect you
     Bodymaster yet; for you've surely saved the lodge."

     And yet it was clear from his actions that he thought more seriously
     of this new intrusion than his words would show. It may have been his
     guilty conscience, it may have been the reputation of the Pinkerton
     organization, it may have been the knowledge that great, rich
     corporations had set themselves the task of clearing out the
     Scowrers; but, whatever his reason, his actions were those of a man
     who is preparing for the worst. Every paper which would incriminate
     him was destroyed before he left the house. After that he gave a long
     sigh of satisfaction; for it seemed to him that he was safe. And yet
     the danger must still have pressed somewhat upon him; for on his way
     to the lodge he stopped at old man Shafter's. The house was forbidden
     him; but when he tapped at the window Ettie came out to him. The
     dancing Irish deviltry had gone from her lover's eyes. She read his
     danger in his earnest face.

     "Something has happened!" she cried. "Oh, Jack, you are in danger!"

     "Sure, it is not very bad, my sweetheart. And yet it may be wise that
     we make a move before it is worse."

     "Make a move?"

     "I promised you once that I would go some day. I think the time is
     coming. I had news to-night, bad news, and I see trouble coming."

     "The police?"

     "Well, a Pinkerton. But, sure, you wouldn't know what that is,
     acushla, nor what it may mean to the likes of me. I'm too deep in
     this thing, and I may have to get out of it quick. You said you would
     come with me if I went."

     "Oh, Jack, it would be the saving of you!"

     "I'm an honest man in some things, Ettie. I wouldn't hurt a hair of
     your bonny head for all that the world can give, nor ever pull you
     down one inch from the golden throne above the clouds where I always
     see you. Would you trust me?"

     She put her hand in his without a word. "Well, then, listen to what I
     say, and do as I order you, for indeed it's the only way for us.
     Things are going to happen in this valley. I feel it in my bones.
     There may be many of us that will have to look out for ourselves. I'm
     one, anyhow. If I go, by day or night, it's you that must come with
     me!"

     "I'd come after you, Jack."

     "No, no, you shall come with me. If this valley is closed to me and I
     can never come back, how can I leave you behind, and me perhaps in
     hiding from the police with never a chance of a message? It's with me
     you must come. I know a good woman in the place I come from, and it's
     there I'd leave you till we can get married. Will you come?"

     "Yes, Jack, I will come."

     "God bless you for your trust in me! It's a fiend out of hell that I
     should be if I abused it. Now, mark you, Ettie, it will be just a
     word to you, and when it reaches you, you will drop everything and
     come right down to the waiting room at the depot and stay there till
     I come for you."

     "Day or night, I'll come at the word, Jack."

     Somewhat eased in mind, now that his own preparations for escape had
     been begun, McMurdo went on to the lodge. It had already assembled,
     and only by complicated signs and counter-signs could he pass through
     the outer guard and inner guard who close-tiled it. A buzz of
     pleasure and welcome greeted him as he entered. The long room was
     crowded, and through the haze of tobacco smoke he saw the tangled
     black mane of the Bodymaster, the cruel, unfriendly features of
     Baldwin, the vulture face of Harraway, the secretary, and a dozen
     more who were among the leaders of the lodge. He rejoiced that they
     should all be there to take counsel over his news.

     "Indeed, it's glad we are to see you, Brother!" cried the chairman.
     "There's business here that wants a Solomon in judgment to set it
     right."

     "It's Lander and Egan," explained his neighbour as he took his seat.
     "They both claim the head money given by the lodge for the shooting
     of old man Crabbe over at Stylestown, and who's to say which fired
     the bullet?"

     McMurdo rose in his place and raised his hand. The expression of his
     face froze the attention of the audience. There was a dead hush of
     expectation.

     "Eminent Bodymaster," he said, in a solemn voice, "I claim urgency!"

     "Brother McMurdo claims urgency," said McGinty. "It's a claim that by
     the rules of this lodge takes precedence. Now Brother, we attend
     you."

     McMurdo took the letter from his pocket.

     "Eminent Bodymaster and Brethren," he said, "I am the bearer of ill
     news this day; but it is better that it should be known and
     discussed, than that a blow should fall upon us without warning which
     would destroy us all. I have information that the most powerful and
     richest organizations in this state have bound themselves together
     for our destruction, and that at this very moment there is a
     Pinkerton detective, one Birdy Edwards, at work in the valley
     collecting the evidence which may put a rope round the necks of many
     of us, and send every man in this room into a felon's cell. That is
     the situation for the discussion of which I have made a claim of
     urgency."

     There was a dead silence in the room. It was broken by the chairman.

     "What is your evidence for this, Brother McMurdo?" he asked.

     "It is in this letter which has come into my hands," said McMurdo. He
     read the passage aloud. "It is a matter of honour with me that I can
     give no further particulars about the letter, nor put it into your
     hands; but I assure you that there is nothing else in it which can
     affect the interests of the lodge. I put the case before you as it
     has reached me."

     "Let me say, Mr. Chairman," said one of the older brethren, "that I
     have heard of Birdy Edwards, and that he has the name of being the
     best man in the Pinkerton service."

     "Does anyone know him by sight?" asked McGinty.

     "Yes," said McMurdo, "I do."

     There was a murmur of astonishment through the hall.

     "I believe we hold him in the hollow of our hands," he continued with
     an exulting smile upon his face. "If we act quickly and wisely, we
     can cut this thing short. If I have your confidence and your help, it
     is little that we have to fear."

     "What have we to fear, anyhow? What can he know of our affairs?"

     "You might say so if all were as stanch as you, Councillor. But this
     man has all the millions of the capitalists at his back. Do you think
     there is no weaker brother among all our lodges that could not be
     bought? He will get at our secrets--maybe has got them already.
     There's only one sure cure."

     "That he never leaves the valley," said Baldwin.

     McMurdo nodded. "Good for you, Brother Baldwin," he said. "You and I
     have had our differences, but you have said the true word to-night."

     "Where is he, then? Where shall we know him?"

     "Eminent Bodymaster," said McMurdo, earnestly, "I would put it to you
     that this is too vital a thing for us to discuss in open lodge. God
     forbid that I should throw a doubt on anyone here; but if so much as
     a word of gossip got to the ears of this man, there would be an end
     of any chance of our getting him. I would ask the lodge to choose a
     trusty committee, Mr. Chairman--yourself, if I might suggest it, and
     Brother Baldwin here, and five more. Then I can talk freely of what I
     know and of what I advise should be done."

     The proposition was at once adopted, and the committee chosen.
     Besides the chairman and Baldwin there were the vulture-faced
     secretary, Harraway, Tiger Cormac, the brutal young assassin, Carter,
     the treasurer, and the brothers Willaby, fearless and desperate men
     who would stick at nothing.

     The usual revelry of the lodge was short and subdued: for there was a
     cloud upon the men's spirits, and many there for the first time began
     to see the cloud of avenging Law drifting up in that serene sky under
     which they had dwelt so long. The horrors they had dealt out to
     others had been so much a part of their settled lives that the
     thought of retribution had become a remote one, and so seemed the
     more startling now that it came so closely upon them. They broke up
     early and left their leaders to their council.

     "Now, McMurdo!" said McGinty when they were alone. The seven men sat
     frozen in their seats.

     "I said just now that I knew Birdy Edwards," McMurdo explained. "I
     need not tell you that he is not here under that name. He's a brave
     man, but not a crazy one. He passes under the name of Steve Wilson,
     and he is lodging at Hobson's Patch."

     "How do you know this?"

     "Because I fell into talk with him. I thought little of it at the
     time, nor would have given it a second thought but for this letter;
     but now I'm sure it's the man. I met him on the cars when I went down
     the line on Wednesday--a hard case if ever there was one. He said he
     was a reporter. I believed it for the moment. Wanted to know all he
     could about the Scowrers and what he called 'the outrages' for a New
     York paper. Asked me every kind of question so as to get something.
     You bet I was giving nothing away. 'I'd pay for it and pay well,'
     said he, 'if I could get some stuff that would suit my editor.' I
     said what I thought would please him best, and he handed me a
     twenty-dollar bill for my information. 'There's ten times that for
     you,' said he, 'if you can find me all that I want.'"

     "What did you tell him, then?"

     "Any stuff I could make up."

     "How do you know he wasn't a newspaper man?"

     "I'll tell you. He got out at Hobson's Patch, and so did I. I chanced
     into the telegraph bureau, and he was leaving it.

     "'See here,' said the operator after he'd gone out, 'I guess we
     should charge double rates for this.'--'I guess you should,' said I.
     He had filled the form with stuff that might have been Chinese, for
     all we could make of it. 'He fires a sheet of this off every day,'
     said the clerk. 'Yes,' said I; 'it's special news for his paper, and
     he's scared that the others should tap it.' That was what the
     operator thought and what I thought at the time; but I think
     differently now."

     "By Gar! I believe you are right," said McGinty. "But what do you
     allow that we should do about it?"

     "Why not go right down now and fix him?" someone suggested.

     "Ay, the sooner the better."

     "I'd start this next minute if I knew where we could find him," said
     McMurdo. "He's in Hobson's Patch; but I don't know the house. I've
     got a plan, though, if you'll only take my advice."

     "Well, what is it?"

     "I'll go to the Patch to-morrow morning. I'll find him through the
     operator. He can locate him, I guess. Well, then I'll tell him that
     I'm a Freeman myself. I'll offer him all the secrets of the lodge for
     a price. You bet he'll tumble to it. I'll tell him the papers are at
     my house, and that it's as much as my life would be worth to let him
     come while folk were about. He'll see that that's horse sense. Let
     him come at ten o'clock at night, and he shall see everything. That
     will fetch him sure."

     "Well?"

     "You can plan the rest for yourselves. Widow MacNamara's is a lonely
     house. She's as true as steel and as deaf as a post. There's only
     Scanlan and me in the house. If I get his promise--and I'll let you
     know if I do--I'd have the whole seven of you come to me by nine
     o'clock. We'll get him in. If ever he gets out alive--well, he can
     talk of Birdy Edwards's luck for the rest of his days!"

     "There's going to be a vacancy at Pinkerton's or I'm mistaken. Leave
     it at that, McMurdo. At nine to-morrow we'll be with you. You once
     get the door shut behind him, and you can leave the rest with us."





          CHAPTER VII
          The Trapping of Birdy Edwards


     As McMurdo had said, the house in which he lived was a lonely one and
     very well suited for such a crime as they had planned. It was on the
     extreme fringe of the town and stood well back from the road. In any
     other case the conspirators would have simply called out their man,
     as they had many a time before, and emptied their pistols into his
     body; but in this instance it was very necessary to find out how much
     he knew, how he knew it, and what had been passed on to his
     employers.

     It was possible that they were already too late and that the work had
     been done. If that was indeed so, they could at least have their
     revenge upon the man who had done it. But they were hopeful that
     nothing of great importance had yet come to the detective's
     knowledge, as otherwise, they argued, he would not have troubled to
     write down and forward such trivial information as McMurdo claimed to
     have given him. However, all this they would learn from his own lips.
     Once in their power, they would find a way to make him speak. It was
     not the first time that they had handled an unwilling witness.

     McMurdo went to Hobson's Patch as agreed. The police seemed to take
     particular interest in him that morning, and Captain Marvin--he who
     had claimed the old acquaintance with him at Chicago--actually
     addressed him as he waited at the station. McMurdo turned away and
     refused to speak with him. He was back from his mission in the
     afternoon, and saw McGinty at the Union House.

     "He is coming," he said.

     "Good!" said McGinty. The giant was in his shirt sleeves, with chains
     and seals gleaming athwart his ample waistcoat and a diamond
     twinkling through the fringe of his bristling beard. Drink and
     politics had made the Boss a very rich as well as powerful man. The
     more terrible, therefore, seemed that glimpse of the prison or the
     gallows which had risen before him the night before.

     "Do you reckon he knows much?" he asked anxiously.

     McMurdo shook his head gloomily. "He's been here some time--six weeks
     at the least. I guess he didn't come into these parts to look at the
     prospect. If he has been working among us all that time with the
     railroad money at his back, I should expect that he has got results,
     and that he has passed them on."

     "There's not a weak man in the lodge," cried McGinty. "True as steel,
     every man of them. And yet, by the Lord! there is that skunk Morris.
     What about him? If any man gives us away, it would be he. I've a mind
     to send a couple of the boys round before evening to give him a
     beating up and see what they can get from him."

     "Well, there would be no harm in that," McMurdo answered. "I won't
     deny that I have a liking for Morris and would be sorry to see him
     come to harm. He has spoken to me once or twice over lodge matters,
     and though he may not see them the same as you or I, he never seemed
     the sort that squeals. But still it is not for me to stand between
     him and you."

     "I'll fix the old devil!" said McGinty with an oath. "I've had my eye
     on him this year past."

     "Well, you know best about that," McMurdo answered. "But whatever you
     do must be to-morrow; for we must lie low until the Pinkerton affair
     is settled up. We can't afford to set the police buzzing, to-day of
     all days."

     "True for you," said McGinty. "And we'll learn from Birdy Edwards
     himself where he got his news if we have to cut his heart out first.
     Did he seem to scent a trap?"

     McMurdo laughed. "I guess I took him on his weak point," he said. "If
     he could get on a good trail of the Scowrers, he's ready to follow it
     into hell. I took his money," McMurdo grinned as he produced a wad of
     dollar notes, "and as much more when he has seen all my papers."

     "What papers?"

     "Well, there are no papers. But I filled him up about constitutions
     and books of rules and forms of membership. He expects to get right
     down to the end of everything before he leaves."

     "Faith, he's right there," said McGinty grimly. "Didn't he ask you
     why you didn't bring him the papers?"

     "As if I would carry such things, and me a suspected man, and Captain
     Marvin after speaking to me this very day at the depot!"

     "Ay, I heard of that," said McGinty. "I guess the heavy end of this
     business is coming on to you. We could put him down an old shaft when
     we've done with him; but however we work it we can't get past the man
     living at Hobson's Patch and you being there to-day."

     McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "If we handle it right, they can
     never prove the killing," said he. "No one can see him come to the
     house after dark, and I'll lay to it that no one will see him go. Now
     see here, Councillor, I'll show you my plan and I'll ask you to fit
     the others into it. You will all come in good time. Very well. He
     comes at ten. He is to tap three times, and me to open the door for
     him. Then I'll get behind him and shut it. He's our man then."

     "That's all easy and plain."

     "Yes; but the next step wants considering. He's a hard proposition.
     He's heavily armed. I've fooled him proper, and yet he is likely to
     be on his guard. Suppose I show him right into a room with seven men
     in it where he expected to find me alone. There is going to be
     shooting, and somebody is going to be hurt."

     "That's so."

     "And the noise is going to bring every damned copper in the township
     on top of it."

     "I guess you are right."

     "This is how I should work it. You will all be in the big room--same
     as you saw when you had a chat with me. I'll open the door for him,
     show him into the parlour beside the door, and leave him there while
     I get the papers. That will give me the chance of telling you how
     things are shaping. Then I will go back to him with some faked
     papers. As he is reading them I will jump for him and get my grip on
     his pistol arm. You'll hear me call and in you will rush. The quicker
     the better; for he is as strong a man as I, and I may have more than
     I can manage. But I allow that I can hold him till you come."

     "It's a good plan," said McGinty. "The lodge will owe you a debt for
     this. I guess when I move out of the chair I can put a name to the
     man that's coming after me."

     "Sure, Councillor, I am little more than a recruit," said McMurdo;
     but his face showed what he thought of the great man's compliment.

     When he had returned home he made his own preparations for the grim
     evening in front of him. First he cleaned, oiled, and loaded his
     Smith & Wesson revolver. Then he surveyed the room in which the
     detective was to be trapped. It was a large apartment, with a long
     deal table in the centre, and the big stove at one side. At each of
     the other sides were windows. There were no shutters on these: only
     light curtains which drew across. McMurdo examined these attentively.
     No doubt it must have struck him that the apartment was very exposed
     for so secret a meeting. Yet its distance from the road made it of
     less consequence. Finally he discussed the matter with his fellow
     lodger. Scanlan, though a Scowrer, was an inoffensive little man who
     was too weak to stand against the opinion of his comrades, but was
     secretly horrified by the deeds of blood at which he had sometimes
     been forced to assist. McMurdo told him shortly what was intended.

     "And if I were you, Mike Scanlan, I would take a night off and keep
     clear of it. There will be bloody work here before morning."

     "Well, indeed then, Mac," Scanlan answered. "It's not the will but
     the nerve that is wanting in me. When I saw Manager Dunn go down at
     the colliery yonder it was just more than I could stand. I'm not made
     for it, same as you or McGinty. If the lodge will think none the
     worse of me, I'll just do as you advise and leave you to yourselves
     for the evening."

     The men came in good time as arranged. They were outwardly
     respectable citizens, well clad and cleanly; but a judge of faces
     would have read little hope for Birdy Edwards in those hard mouths
     and remorseless eyes. There was not a man in the room whose hands had
     not been reddened a dozen times before. They were as hardened to
     human murder as a butcher to sheep.

     Foremost, of course, both in appearance and in guilt, was the
     formidable Boss. Harraway, the secretary, was a lean, bitter man with
     a long, scraggy neck and nervous, jerky limbs, a man of incorruptible
     fidelity where the finances of the order were concerned, and with no
     notion of justice or honesty to anyone beyond. The treasurer, Carter,
     was a middle-aged man, with an impassive, rather sulky expression,
     and a yellow parchment skin. He was a capable organizer, and the
     actual details of nearly every outrage had sprung from his plotting
     brain. The two Willabys were men of action, tall, lithe young fellows
     with determined faces, while their companion, Tiger Cormac, a heavy,
     dark youth, was feared even by his own comrades for the ferocity of
     his disposition. These were the men who assembled that night under
     the roof of McMurdo for the killing of the Pinkerton detective.

     Their host had placed whisky upon the table, and they had hastened to
     prime themselves for the work before them. Baldwin and Cormac were
     already half-drunk, and the liquor had brought out all their
     ferocity. Cormac placed his hands on the stove for an instant--it had
     been lighted, for the nights were still cold.

     "That will do," said he, with an oath.

     "Ay," said Baldwin, catching his meaning. "If he is strapped to that,
     we will have the truth out of him."

     "We'll have the truth out of him, never fear," said McMurdo. He had
     nerves of steel, this man; for though the whole weight of the affair
     was on him his manner was as cool and unconcerned as ever. The others
     marked it and applauded.

     "You are the one to handle him," said the Boss approvingly. "Not a
     warning will he get till your hand is on his throat. It's a pity
     there are no shutters to your windows."

     McMurdo went from one to the other and drew the curtains tighter.
     "Sure no one can spy upon us now. It's close upon the hour."

     "Maybe he won't come. Maybe he'll get a sniff of danger," said the
     secretary.

     "He'll come, never fear," McMurdo answered. "He is as eager to come
     as you can be to see him. Hark to that!"

     They all sat like wax figures, some with their glasses arrested
     halfway to their lips. Three loud knocks had sounded at the door.

     "Hush!" McMurdo raised his hand in caution. An exulting glance went
     round the circle, and hands were laid upon hidden weapons.

     "Not a sound, for your lives!" McMurdo whispered, as he went from the
     room, closing the door carefully behind him.

     With strained ears the murderers waited. They counted the steps of
     their comrade down the passage. Then they heard him open the outer
     door. There were a few words as of greeting. Then they were aware of
     a strange step inside and of an unfamiliar voice. An instant later
     came the slam of the door and the turning of the key in the lock.
     Their prey was safe within the trap. Tiger Cormac laughed horribly,
     and Boss McGinty clapped his great hand across his mouth.

     "Be quiet, you fool!" he whispered. "You'll be the undoing of us
     yet!"

     There was a mutter of conversation from the next room. It seemed
     interminable. Then the door opened, and McMurdo appeared, his finger
     upon his lip.

     He came to the end of the table and looked round at them. A subtle
     change had come over him. His manner was as of one who has great work
     to do. His face had set into granite firmness. His eyes shone with a
     fierce excitement behind his spectacles. He had become a visible
     leader of men. They stared at him with eager interest; but he said
     nothing. Still with the same singular gaze he looked from man to man.

     "Well!" cried Boss McGinty at last. "Is he here? Is Birdy Edwards
     here?"

     "Yes," McMurdo answered slowly. "Birdy Edwards is here. I am Birdy
     Edwards!"

     There were ten seconds after that brief speech during which the room
     might have been empty, so profound was the silence. The hissing of a
     kettle upon the stove rose sharp and strident to the ear. Seven white
     faces, all turned upward to this man who dominated them, were set
     motionless with utter terror. Then, with a sudden shivering of glass,
     a bristle of glistening rifle barrels broke through each window,
     while the curtains were torn from their hangings.

     At the sight Boss McGinty gave the roar of a wounded bear and plunged
     for the half-opened door. A levelled revolver met him there with the
     stern blue eyes of Captain Marvin of the Mine Police gleaming behind
     the sights. The Boss recoiled and fell back into his chair.

     "You're safer there, Councillor," said the man whom they had known as
     McMurdo. "And you, Baldwin, if you don't take your hand off your
     pistol, you'll cheat the hangman yet. Pull it out, or by the Lord
     that made me--There, that will do. There are forty armed men round
     this house, and you can figure it out for yourself what chance you
     have. Take their pistols, Marvin!"

     There was no possible resistance under the menace of those rifles.
     The men were disarmed. Sulky, sheepish, and amazed, they still sat
     round the table.

     "I'd like to say a word to you before we separate," said the man who
     had trapped them. "I guess we may not meet again until you see me on
     the stand in the courthouse. I'll give you something to think over
     between now and then. You know me now for what I am. At last I can
     put my cards on the table. I am Birdy Edwards of Pinkerton's. I was
     chosen to break up your gang. I had a hard and dangerous game to
     play. Not a soul, not one soul, not my nearest and dearest, knew that
     I was playing it. Only Captain Marvin here and my employers knew
     that. But it's over to-night, thank God, and I am the winner!"

     The seven pale, rigid faces looked up at him. There was unappeasable
     hatred in their eyes. He read the relentless threat.

     "Maybe you think that the game is not over yet. Well, I take my
     chance of that. Anyhow, some of you will take no further hand, and
     there are sixty more besides yourselves that will see a jail this
     night. I'll tell you this, that when I was put upon this job I never
     believed there was such a society as yours. I thought it was paper
     talk, and that I would prove it so. They told me it was to do with
     the Freemen; so I went to Chicago and was made one. Then I was surer
     than ever that it was just paper talk; for I found no harm in the
     society, but a deal of good.

     "Still, I had to carry out my job, and I came to the coal valleys.
     When I reached this place I learned that I was wrong and that it
     wasn't a dime novel after all. So I stayed to look after it. I never
     killed a man in Chicago. I never minted a dollar in my life. Those I
     gave you were as good as any others; but I never spent money better.
     But I knew the way into your good wishes and so I pretended to you
     that the law was after me. It all worked just as I thought.

     "So I joined your infernal lodge, and I took my share in your
     councils. Maybe they will say that I was as bad as you. They can say
     what they like, so long as I get you. But what is the truth? The
     night I joined you beat up old man Stanger. I could not warn him, for
     there was no time; but I held your hand, Baldwin, when you would have
     killed him. If ever I have suggested things, so as to keep my place
     among you, they were things which I knew I could prevent. I could not
     save Dunn and Menzies, for I did not know enough; but I will see that
     their murderers are hanged. I gave Chester Wilcox warning, so that
     when I blew his house in he and his folk were in hiding. There was
     many a crime that I could not stop; but if you look back and think
     how often your man came home the other road, or was down in town when
     you went for him, or stayed indoors when you thought he would come
     out, you'll see my work."

     "You blasted traitor!" hissed McGinty through his closed teeth.

     "Ay, John McGinty, you may call me that if it eases your smart. You
     and your like have been the enemy of God and man in these parts. It
     took a man to get between you and the poor devils of men and women
     that you held under your grip. There was just one way of doing it,
     and I did it. You call me a traitor; but I guess there's many a
     thousand will call me a deliverer that went down into hell to save
     them. I've had three months of it. I wouldn't have three such months
     again if they let me loose in the treasury at Washington for it. I
     had to stay till I had it all, every man and every secret right here
     in this hand. I'd have waited a little longer if it hadn't come to my
     knowledge that my secret was coming out. A letter had come into the
     town that would have set you wise to it all. Then I had to act and
     act quickly.

     "I've nothing more to say to you, except that when my time comes I'll
     die the easier when I think of the work I have done in this valley.
     Now, Marvin, I'll keep you no more. Take them in and get it over."

     There is little more to tell. Scanlan had been given a sealed note to
     be left at the address of Miss Ettie Shafter, a mission which he had
     accepted with a wink and a knowing smile. In the early hours of the
     morning a beautiful woman and a much muffled man boarded a special
     train which had been sent by the railroad company, and made a swift,
     unbroken journey out of the land of danger. It was the last time that
     ever either Ettie or her lover set foot in the Valley of Fear. Ten
     days later they were married in Chicago, with old Jacob Shafter as
     witness of the wedding.

     The trial of the Scowrers was held far from the place where their
     adherents might have terrified the guardians of the law. In vain they
     struggled. In vain the money of the lodge--money squeezed by
     blackmail out of the whole countryside--was spent like water in the
     attempt to save them. That cold, clear, unimpassioned statement from
     one who knew every detail of their lives, their organization, and
     their crimes was unshaken by all the wiles of their defenders. At
     last after so many years they were broken and scattered. The cloud
     was lifted forever from the valley.

     McGinty met his fate upon the scaffold, cringing and whining when the
     last hour came. Eight of his chief followers shared his fate.
     Fifty-odd had various degrees of imprisonment. The work of Birdy
     Edwards was complete.

     And yet, as he had guessed, the game was not over yet. There was
     another hand to be played, and yet another and another. Ted Baldwin,
     for one, had escaped the scaffold; so had the Willabys; so had
     several others of the fiercest spirits of the gang. For ten years
     they were out of the world, and then came a day when they were free
     once more--a day which Edwards, who knew his men, was very sure would
     be an end of his life of peace. They had sworn an oath on all that
     they thought holy to have his blood as a vengeance for their
     comrades. And well they strove to keep their vow!

     From Chicago he was chased, after two attempts so near success that
     it was sure that the third would get him. From Chicago he went under
     a changed name to California, and it was there that the light went
     for a time out of his life when Ettie Edwards died. Once again he was
     nearly killed, and once again under the name of Douglas he worked in
     a lonely canyon, where with an English partner named Barker he
     amassed a fortune. At last there came a warning to him that the
     bloodhounds were on his track once more, and he cleared--only just in
     time--for England. And thence came the John Douglas who for a second
     time married a worthy mate, and lived for five years as a Sussex
     county gentleman, a life which ended with the strange happenings of
     which we have heard.





          CHAPTER VIII
          Epilogue


     The police trial had passed, in which the case of John Douglas was
     referred to a higher court. So had the Quarter Sessions, at which he
     was acquitted as having acted in self-defense.

     "Get him out of England at any cost," wrote Holmes to the wife.
     "There are forces here which may be more dangerous than those he has
     escaped. There is no safety for your husband in England."

     Two months had gone by, and the case had to some extent passed from
     our minds. Then one morning there came an enigmatic note slipped into
     our letter box. "Dear me, Mr. Holmes. Dear me!" said this singular
     epistle. There was neither superscription nor signature. I laughed at
     the quaint message; but Holmes showed unwonted seriousness.

     "Deviltry, Watson!" he remarked, and sat long with a clouded brow.

     Late last night Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, brought up a message that
     a gentleman wished to see Holmes, and that the matter was of the
     utmost importance. Close at the heels of his messenger came Cecil
     Barker, our friend of the moated Manor House. His face was drawn and
     haggard.

     "I've had bad news--terrible news, Mr. Holmes," said he.

     "I feared as much," said Holmes.

     "You have not had a cable, have you?"

     "I have had a note from someone who has."

     "It's poor Douglas. They tell me his name is Edwards; but he will
     always be Jack Douglas of Benito Canyon to me. I told you that they
     started together for South Africa in the Palmyra three weeks ago."

     "Exactly."

     "The ship reached Cape Town last night. I received this cable from
     Mrs. Douglas this morning:--

     "Jack has been lost overboard in gale off St. Helena. No one knows
     how accident occurred.
     "Ivy Douglas."

     "Ha! It came like that, did it?" said Holmes, thoughtfully. "Well,
     I've no doubt it was well stage-managed."

     "You mean that you think there was no accident?"

     "None in the world."

     "He was murdered?"

     "Surely!"

     "So I think also. These infernal Scowrers, this cursed vindictive
     nest of criminals--"

     "No, no, my good sir," said Holmes. "There is a master hand here. It
     is no case of sawed-off shot-guns and clumsy six-shooters. You can
     tell an old master by the sweep of his brush. I can tell a Moriarty
     when I see one. This crime is from London, not from America."

     "But for what motive?"

     "Because it is done by a man who cannot afford to fail--one whose
     whole unique position depends upon the fact that all he does must
     succeed. A great brain and a huge organization have been turned to
     the extinction of one man. It is crushing the nut with the hammer--an
     absurd extravagance of energy--but the nut is very effectually
     crushed all the same."

     "How came this man to have anything to do with it?"

     "I can only say that the first word that ever came to us of the
     business was from one of his lieutenants. These Americans were well
     advised. Having an English job to do, they took into partnership, as
     any foreign criminal could do, this great consultant in crime. From
     that moment their man was doomed. At first he would content himself
     by using his machinery in order to find their victim. Then he would
     indicate how the matter might be treated. Finally, when he read in
     the reports of the failure of this agent, he would step in himself
     with a master touch. You heard me warn this man at Birlstone Manor
     House that the coming danger was greater than the past. Was I right?"

     Barker beat his head with his clenched fist in his impotent anger.

     "Do you tell me that we have to sit down under this? Do you say that
     no one can ever get level with this king-devil?"

     "No, I don't say that," said Holmes, and his eyes seemed to be
     looking far into the future. "I don't say that he can't be beat. But
     you must give me time--you must give me time!"

     We all sat in silence for some minutes, while those fateful eyes
     still strained to pierce the veil.


     It was a Thursday, but it felt like a Monday to John. And John loved Mondays. He thrived at work. He dismissed the old clich of dreading Monday mornings and refused to engage in water-cooler complaints about the grind and empty conversations that included the familiar parry How was your weekend? Too short!. Yes, John liked his work and was unashamed.

I should probably get another latte. Ive just been sitting here with this empty cup. But then Ill start to get jittery. Ill get a decaf. No, thats stupid, it feels stupid to pay for a decaf. I cant justify that.

John was always impatient on the weekends; he missed the formal structure of the business week. When he was younger he used to stay late after school on Fridays and come in early on Mondays, a pattern his mother referred to with equal parts admiration and disdain as studying overtime.

Jesus, Ive written another loser.

Now, John spent his weekends doing yard work at the Tudor house Rebecca left him after their divorce. Rebecca, with her almond eyesboth in shape and in colorcould never be his enemy.

That barista keeps looking at me. Shell probably ask me to leave if I dont buy something. Shes kind of attractive. Not her hairher hair seems stringybut her face is nice. I should really buy something.

Their divorce was remarkably amicable. In fact, John would often tell his parents, Rebecca and I are better friends now than when we were married! In fact, John looked forward to the days when he and Rebecca, with their new partners, would reminisce about their marriage, seeing it in a positive light, like two mature adults.

Maybe Ill just get a pumpkin-spice loaf. That way I can still sit here without going through a whole production of buying a coffee and giving my name and feeling like an asshole while it gets made.

But if John were being honest, the house did get lonely on the weekends. Rebeccas parents had been generous enough to leave John the house even though they had paid for it. John was still struggling to get his short-story writingI mean, his paintingcareer off the ground, and Rebecca and her family had been more than supportive, even during the breakup.

Maybe the baristas looking at me because she thinks Im attractive. I am in my blue shirt. So she has stringy hair? Who am I to complain about stringy hair? Who do I think I am? Cary Grant?

And now John was doing temp work at the law firm of Fleurstein and Kaplowitz to get himself righted again. He had a strong six-month plan: he would save some money to pay Rebeccas parents back for the house and be able to take some time off to focus on his writingon his painting. In a few months, he would be back on his feet, probably even engaged to someone new. Maybe even that barista. Yes, almost paradoxically, temp work provided John with the stability he craved.
This is shit. It is utter shit.

Actually, in moments of great self-reflection, John hated his work. Who was he kidding? He was doing temp work. No one has ever liked temp work. It reinforced his feeling of instability, confirmed his cynical view of the job market, and took him away from the only thing he ever enjoyed doing, which was writing short storiesI mean painting! Painting! John enjoyed painting!

I think I have to pee.

And John was a great painter.

Literally every single person on line for the bathroom looks homeless. Maybe I can just go in and not touch anything. Ill just lift the seat up with my shoe.

John often wondered how Steve Bowman from college was having so much success while John was stuck doing temp work in a futile attempt to pay back Rebeccas passive-aggressive parents for a house he hadnt even wanted them to buy. And Steve Bowman was a talentless hack who even admitted to John that he only writespaints!so that he can bag women. He actually said bag women. But Rebecca thinks hes interesting and that they could have a real life together. I hope they both die of cancer. What did John have with Rebecca? How was that not real? Maybe if Rebeccas parents had let John breathe instead of forcing their hypocritical Christian values down his throat every chance they got, their relationship would have been more real. Good luck, Steve Bowman. I hope you like having a mother-in-law with no boundaries.

I think I will get another latte. That barista is so sexy. Id love to pull her stringy hair while we have sex on my floor.

John would often go to Rebecca and Steves new house in the middle of the night and just stare in their window.

She probably has a back tattoo. So slutty.

John would secretly hope to see Steve and Rebecca fighting. He would fantasize about seeing their silhouettes through the window, Rebecca throwing the telephone at Steve and him ducking but it still hitting him in the head. John would get aroused by this fantasy.

Ill say something cool, like The coffees not the only thing hot in here. And shell probably be like, I get off at seven. And Ill probably say something like I dont have a real job, so any times good for me. Jesus, who am I kidding? Im a loser. She would never like me. Even a stringy-haired barista with a slutty back tattoo would never like me.
But, of course, John never saw anything in Steve and Rebeccas window. He thought of urinating in a glass bottle and throwing it through their window, but he couldnt even work up the courage to do that. He was a loser who couldnt even commit a petty act of vandalism.

He was a dumb dumb stupid dumb writerpainter!who couldnt even afford an office, so he wrotepainted!in a Starbucks because he got fired from Fleurstein and Kaplowitz for making copies of his storiespaintings!when he was supposed to be copying legal briefs for those corrupt corporate shylocks.

And Rebecca would never come back to him and no one would ever love him and he was going to die fat and bald and alone and miserable in the ugly house his in-laws bought to suffocate and kill him!

Maybe Ill get a tea. I like that hibiscus one. Its sweet but not too sweet. Its nice. Its a nice flavor.

And maybe I will get a slice of that pumpkin loaf. I think I had it before. I think I definitely liked it. I think it must be seasonal. I havent seen it in a while.

Ill eat and drink and then get back to work. Everything seems to be flowing well. It was a little tough getting into it but now its really flowing. Its weird how I do thathow I think I cant write something and suddenly Im carried away and then I cant stop writing. I think Im too hard on myself. I think I punish myself for no reason. But I think Im really hitting my stride now. Ill just get that tea. That nice hibiscus tea.

And then get back to work.

THE Mole had been working very hard all the morning, spring-cleaning his little home. First with brooms, then with dusters; then on ladders and steps and chairs, with a brush and a pail of whitewash; till he had dust in his throat and eyes, and splashes of whitewash all over his black fur, and an aching back and weary arms. Spring was moving in the air above and in the earth below and around him, penetrating even his dark and lowly little house with its spirit of divine discontent and longing. It was small wonder, then, that he suddenly flung down his brush on the floor, said Bother! and O blow! and also Hang springcleaning! and bolted out of the house without even waiting to put on his coat.

Something up above was calling him imperiously, and he made for the steep little tunnel which answered in his case to the gravelled carriage-drive owned by animals whose residences are nearer to the sun and air. So he scraped and scratched and scrabbled and scrooged and then he scrooged again and scrabbled and scratched and scraped, working busily with his little paws and muttering to himself, Up we go! Up we go! till at last, pop! his snout came out into the sunlight, and he found himself rolling in the warm grass of a great meadow.

This is fine! he said to himself. This is better than whitewashing! The sunshine struck hot on his fur, soft breezes caressed his heated brow, and after the seclusion of the cellarage he had lived in so long the carol of happy birds fell on his dulled hearing almost like a shout. Jumping off all his four legs at once, in the joy of living and the delight of spring without its cleaning, he pursued his way across the meadow till he reached the hedge on the further side.

Hold up! said an elderly rabbit at the gap. Sixpence for the privilege of passing by the private road! He was bowled over in an instant by the impatient and contemptuous Mole, who trotted along the side of the hedge chaffing the other rabbits as they peeped hurriedly from their holes to see what the row was about.

Onion-sauce! Onion-sauce! he remarked jeeringly, and was gone before they could think of a thoroughly satisfactory reply. Then they all started grumbling at each other. How stupid you are! Why didnt you tell him- Well, why didnt you say- You might have reminded him- and so on, in the usual way; but, of course, it was then much too late, as is always the case.

It all seemed too good to be true. Hither and thither through the meadows he rambled busily, along the hedgerows, across the copses, finding everywhere birds building, flowers budding, leaves thrusting- everything happy, and progressive, and occupied. And instead of having an uneasy conscience pricking him and whispering whitewash! he somehow could only feel how jolly it was to be the only idle dog among all these busy citizens. After all, the best part of a holiday is perhaps not so much to be resting yourself, as to see all the other fellows busy working.

He thought his happiness was complete when, as he meandered aimlessly along, suddenly he stood by the edge of a full-fed river. Never in his life had he seen a river

before- this sleek, sinuous, full-bodied animal, chasing and chuckling, gripping things with a gurgle and leaving them with a laugh, to fling itself on fresh playmates that shook themselves free, and were caught and held again. All was a-shake and a-shiver- glints and gleams and sparkles, rustle and swirl, chatter and bubble. The Mole was bewitched, entranced, fascinated. By the side of the river he trotted as one trots, when very small, by the side of a man who holds one spell-bound by exciting stories; and when tired at last, he sat on the bank, while the river still chattered on to him, a babbling procession of the best stories in the world, sent from the heart of the earth to be told at last to the insatiable sea.

As he sat on the grass and looked across the river, a dark hole in the bank opposite, just above the waters edge, caught his eye, and dreamily he fell to considering what a nice snug dwelling-place it would make for an animal with few wants and fond of a bijou riverside residence, above flood level and remote from noise and dust. As he gazed, something bright and small seemed to twinkle down in the heart of it, vanished, then twinkled once more like a tiny star. But it could hardly be a star in such an unlikely situation; and it was too glittering and small for a glow-worm. Then, as he looked, it winked at him, and so declared itself to be an eye; and a small face began gradually to grow up round it, like a frame round a picture.

A brown little face, with whiskers. A grave round face, with the same twinkle in its eye that had first attracted his notice. Small neat ears and thick silky hair. It was the Water Rat! Then the two animals stood and regarded each other cautiously. Hullo, Mole! said the Water Rat. Hullo, Rat! said the Mole. Would you like to come over? enquired the Rat presently. Oh, its all very well to talk, said the Mole, rather pettishly, he being new to a river and riverside life and its ways. The Rat said nothing, but stooped and unfastened a rope and hauled on it; then lightly stepped into a little boat which the Mole had not observed. It was painted blue outside and white within, and was just the size for two animals; and the Moles whole heart went out to it at once, even though he did not yet fully understand its uses. The Rat sculled smartly across and made fast. Then he held up his forepaw as the Mole stepped gingerly down. Lean on that! he said. Now then, step lively! and the Mole to his surprise and rapture found himself actually seated in the stern of a real boat. This has been a wonderful day! said he, as the Rat shoved off and took to the sculls again. Do you know, Ive never been in a boat before in all my life. What? cried the Rat, open-mouthed: Never been in a- you never- well Iwhat have you been doing, then? Is it so nice as all that? asked the Mole shyly, though he was quite prepared to believe it as he leant back in his seat and surveyed the cushions, the oars, the rowlocks, and all the fascinating fittings, and felt the boat sway lightly under him. Nice? Its the only thing, said the Water Rat solemnly, as he leant forward for his stroke. Believe me, my young friend, there is nothing- absolute nothinghalf so much

worth doing as simply messing about in boats. Simply messing, he went on dreamily: messing- about- in- boats; messing- Look ahead, Rat! cried the Mole suddenly. It was too late. The boat struck the bank full tilt. The dreamer, the joyous oarsman, lay on his back at the bottom of the boat, his heels in the air.

-about in boats- or with boats, the Rat went on composedly, picking himself up with a pleasant laugh. In or out of em, it doesnt matter. Nothing seems really to matter, thats the charm of it. Whether you get away, or whether you dont; whether you arrive at your destination or whether you reach somewhere else, or whether you never get anywhere at all, youre always busy, and you never do anything in particular; and when youve done it theres always something else to do, and you can do it if you like, but youd much better not. Look here! If youve really nothing else on hand this morning, supposing we drop down the river together, and have a long day of it? The Mole waggled his toes from sheer happiness, spread his chest with a sigh of full contentment, and leaned back blissfully into the soft cushions. What a day Im having! he said. Let us start at once! Hold hard a minute, then! said the Rat. He looped the painter through a ring in his landing-stage, climbed up into his hole above, and after a short interval reappeared staggering under a fat, wicker luncheon-basket.

Shove that under your feet, he observed to the Mole, as he passed it down into the boat. Then he untied the painter and took the sculls again. Whats inside it? asked the Mole, wriggling with curiosity. Theres cold chicken inside it, replied the Rat briefly; coldtonguecoldhamcoldbeefpickledgherkinssaladfrenchrolls resssandwichespottedmeatgingerbeerlemonadesodawater- O stop, stop, cried the Mole in ecstacies: This is too much! Do you really think so? enquired the Rat seriously. Its only what I always take on these little excursions; and the other animals are always telling me that Im a mean beast and cut it very fine!

The Mole never heard a word he was saying. Absorbed in the new life he was entering upon, intoxicated with the sparkle, the ripple, the scents and the sounds and the sunlight, he trailed a paw in the water and dreamed long waking dreams. The Water Rat, like the good little fellow he was, sculled steadily on and forebore to disturb him.

I like your clothes awfully, old chap, he remarked after some half an hour or so had passed. Im going to get a black velvet smoking-suit myself some day, as soon as I can afford it. I beg your pardon, said the Mole, pulling himself together with an effort. You must think me very rude; but all this is so new to me. So- this- is- a- River! The River, corrected the Rat.

And you really live by the river? What a jolly life! By it and with it and on it and in it, said the Rat. Its brother and sister to me, and aunts, and company, and food and drink, and (naturally) washing. Its my world, and I dont want any other. What it hasnt got is not worth having, and what it doesnt know is not worth knowing. Lord! the times weve had together! Whether in winter or summer, spring or autumn, its always got its fun and its excitements. When the floods are on in February, and my cellars and basement are brimming with drink thats no good to me, and the brown water runs by my best bedroom window; or again when it all drops away and shows

patches of mud that smells like plum-cake, and the rushes and weed clog the channels, and I can potter about dry shod over most of the bed of it and find fresh food to eat, and things careless people have dropped out of boats! But isnt it a bit dull at times? the Mole ventured to ask. Just you and the river, and no one else to pass a word with? No one else to- well, I mustnt be hard on you, said the Rat with forbearance. Youre new to it, and of course you dont know. The bank is so crowded nowadays that many people are moving away altogether: O no, it isnt what it used to be, at all. Otters, kingfishers, dabchicks, moorhens, all of them about all day long and always wanting you to do something- as if a fellow had no business of his own to attend to! What lies over there? asked the Mole, waving a paw towards a background of woodland that darkly framed the water-meadows on one side of the river.

That? O, thats just the Wild Wood, said the Rat shortly. We dont go there very much, we river-bankers. Arent they- arent they very nice people in there? said the Mole, a trifle nervously. W-e-ll, replied the Rat, let me see. The squirrels are all right. And the rabbits- some of em, but rabbits are a mixed lot. And then theres Badger, of course.

He lives right in the heart of it; wouldnt live anywhere else, either, if you paid him to do it. Dear old Badger! Nobody interferes with him. Theyd better not, he added significantly . Why, who should interfere with him? asked the Mole.

Well, of course- there- are others, explained the Rat in a hesitating sort of way. Weasels- and stoats- and foxes- and so on. Theyre all right in a way- Im very good friends with them- pass the time of day when we meet, and all that- but they break out sometimes, theres no denying it, and then- well, you cant really trust them, and thats the fact. The Mole knew well that it is quite against animal-etiquette to dwell on possible trouble ahead, or even to allude to it; so he dropped the subject. And beyond the Wild Wood again? he asked: Where its all blue and dim, and one sees what may be hills or perhaps they maynt, and something like the smoke of towns, or is it only cloud-drift? Beyond the Wild Wood comes the Wide World, said the Rat. And thats something that doesnt matter, either to you or me. Ive never been there, and Im never going, nor you either, if youve got any sense at all. Dont ever refer to it again, please. Now then! Heres our backwater at last, where were going to lunch. Leaving the main stream, they now passed into what seemed at first sight like a little landlocked lake. Green turf sloped down to either edge, brown snaky treeroots gleamed below the surface of the quiet water, while ahead of them the silvery shoulder and foamy tumble of a weir, arm-in-arm with a restless dripping mill-wheel, that held up in its turn a grey-gabled mill-house, filled the air with a soothing murmur of sound, dull and smothery, yet with little clear voices speaking up cheerfully out of it at intervals. It was so very beautiful that the Mole could only hold up both forepaws and gasp, O my! O my! O my! The Rat brought the boat alongside the bank, made her fast, helped the still awkward Mole safely ashore, and swung out the luncheon-basket. The Mole begged as a favour to be allowed to unpack it all by himself; and the Rat was very pleased to indulge him, and to sprawl at full length on the grass and rest, while his excited friend shook out the table-cloth and spread it, took out all the mysterious

packets one by one and arranged their contents in due order, still gasping, O my! O my! at each fresh revelation. When all was ready, the Rat said, Now, pitch in, old fellow! and the Mole was indeed very glad to obey, for he had started his spring- cleaning at a very early hour that morning, as people will do, and had not paused for bite or sup; and he had been through a very great deal since that distant time which now seemed so many days ago.

What are you looking at? said the Rat presently, when the edge of their hunger was somewhat dulled, and the Moles eyes were able to wander off the tablecloth a little. I am looking, said the Mole, at a streak of bubbles that I see travelling along the surface of the water. That is a thing that strikes me as funny. Bubbles? Oho! said the Rat, and chirruped cheerily in an inviting sort of way.

A broad glistening muzzle showed itself above the edge of the bank, and the Otter hauled himself out and shook the water from his coat. Greedy beggars! he observed, making for the provender. Why didnt you invite me, Ratty? This was an impromptu affair, explained the Rat. By the way- my friend Mr. Mole. Proud, Im sure, said the Otter, and the two animals were friends forthwith. Such a rumpus everywhere! continued the Otter. All the world seems out on the river to-day. I came up this backwater to try and get a moments peace, and then stumble upon you fellows!- At least- I beg pardon- I dont exactly mean that, you know. There was a rustle behind them, proceeding from a hedge wherein last years leaves still clung thick, and a stripy head, with high shoulders behind it, peered forth on them. Come on, old Badger! shouted the Rat.

The Badger trotted forward a pace or two; then grunted, Hm! Company, and turned his back and disappeared from view. Thats just the sort of fellow he is! observed the disappointed Rat. Simply hates Society! Now we shant see any more of him to-day. Well, tell us, whos out on the river?

Toads out, for one, replied the Otter. In his brand-new wager-boat; new togs, new everything! The two animals looked at each other and laughed. Once, it was nothing but sailing, said the Rat. Then he tired of that and took to punting. Nothing would please him but to punt all day and every day, and a nice mess he made of it. Last year it was house-boating, and we all had to go and stay with him in his house-boat, and pretend we liked it. He was going to spend the rest of his life in a house-boat. Its all the same, whatever he takes up; he gets tired of it, and starts on something fresh. Such a good fellow, too, remarked the Otter reflectively: But no stabilityespecially in a boat! From where they sat they could get a glimpse of the main stream across the island that separated them; and just then a wager-boat flashed into view, the rowera short, stout figure- splashing badly and rolling a good deal, but working his hardest. The Rat stood up and hailed him, but Toad- for it was he- shook his head and settled sternly to his work.

Hell be out of the boat in a minute if he rolls like that, said the Rat, sitting down again. Of course he will, chuckled the Otter. Did I ever tell you that good story about Toad and the lock-keeper? It happened this way. Toad.

An errant May-fly swerved unsteadily athwart the current in the intoxicated fashion affected by young bloods of May-flies seeing life. A swirl of water and a cloop! and the May-fly was visible no more. Neither was the Otter.

The Mole looked down. The voice was still in his ears, but the turf whereon he had sprawled was clearly vacant. Not an Otter to be seen, as far as the distant horizon. But again there was a streak of bubbles on the surface of the river. The Rat hummed a tune, and the Mole recollected that animal-etiquette forbade any sort of comment on the sudden disappearance of ones friends at any moment, for any reason or no reason whatever.

Well, well, said the Rat, I suppose we ought to be moving. I wonder which of us had better pack the luncheon-basket? He did not speak as if he was frightfully eager for the treat. O, please let me, said the Mole. So, of course, the Rat let him.

Packing the basket was not quite such pleasant work as unpacking the basket. It never is. But the Mole was bent on enjoying everything, and although just when he had got the basket packed and strapped up tightly he saw a plate staring up at him from the grass, and when the job had been done again the Rat pointed out a fork which anybody ought to have seen, and last of all, behold! the mustard pot, which he had been sitting on without knowing it- still, somehow, the thing got finished at last, without much loss of temper. The afternoon sun was getting low as the Rat sculled gently homewards in a dreamy mood, murmuring poetry-things over to himself, and not paying much attention to Mole. But the Mole was very full of lunch, and self-satisfaction, and pride, and already quite at home in a boat (so he thought) and was getting a bit restless besides: and presently he said, Ratty! Please, I want to row, now! The Rat shook his head with a smile. Not yet, my young friend, he saidwait till youve had a few lessons. Its not so easy as it looks. The Mole was quiet for a minute or two. But he began to feel more and more jealous of Rat, sculling so strongly and so easily along, and his pride began to whisper that he could do it every bit as well. He jumped up and seized the sculls, so suddenly, that the Rat, who was gazing out over the water and saying more poetry- things to himself, was taken by surprise and fell backwards off his seat with his legs in the air for the second time, while the triumphant Mole took his place and grabbed the sculls with entire confidence. Stop it, you silly ass! cried the Rat, from the bottom of the boat. You cant do it! Youll have us over! The Mole flung his sculls back with a flourish, and made a great dig at the water. He missed the surface altogether, his legs flew up above his head, and he found himself lying on the top of the prostrate Rat. Greatly alarmed, he made a grab at the side of the boat, and the next moment- Sploosh! Over went the boat, and he found himself struggling in the river. O my, how cold the water was, and O, how very wet it felt. How it sang in his ears as he went down, down, down! How bright and welcome the sun looked as he rose to the surface coughing and spluttering! How black was his despair when he felt himself sinking again! Then a firm paw gripped him by the back of his neck. It was the Rat, and

he was evidently laughing- the Mole could feel him laughing, right down his arm and through his paw, and so into his- the Molesneck. The Rat got hold of a scull and shoved it under the Moles arm; then he did the same by the other side of him and, swimming behind, propelled the helpless animal to shore, hauled him out, and set him down on the bank, a squashy, pulpy lump of misery. When the Rat had rubbed him down a bit, and wrung some of the wet out of him, he said, Now, then, old fellow! Trot up and down the towing-path as hard as you can, till youre warm and dry again, while I dive for the luncheon-basket. So the dismal Mole, wet without and ashamed within, trotted about till he was fairly dry, while the Rat plunged into the water again, recovered the boat, righted her and made her fast, fetched his floating property to shore by degrees, and finally dived successfully for the luncheon-basket and struggled to land with it.

When all was ready for a start once more, the Mole, limp and dejected, took his seat in the stern of the boat; and as they set off, he said in a low voice, broken with emotion, Ratty, my generous friend! I am very sorry indeed for my foolish and ungrateful conduct. My heart quite fails me when I think how I might have lost that beautiful luncheon-basket. Indeed, I have been a complete ass, and I know it. Will you overlook it this once and forgive me, and let things go on as before? Thats all right, bless you! responded the Rat cheerily. Whats a little wet to a Water Rat? Im more in the water than out of it most days. Dont you think any more about it; and, look here! I really think you had better come and stop with me for a little time. Its very plain and rough, you know- not like Toads house at allbut you havent seen that yet; still, I can make you comfortable. And Ill teach you to row, and to swim, and youll soon be as handy on the water as any of us. The Mole was so touched by his kind manner of speaking that he could find no voice to answer him; and he had to brush away a tear or two with the back of his paw. But the Rat kindly looked in another direction, and presently the Moles spirits revived again, and he was even able to give some straight back-talk to a couple of moorhens who were sniggering to each other about his bedraggled appearance.

When they got home, the Rat made a bright fire in the parlour, and planted the Mole in an arm-chair in front of it, having, fetched down a dressing-gown and slippers for him, and told him river stories till supper-time. Very thrilling stories they were, too, to an earth-dwelling animal like Mole. Stories about weirs, and sudden floods, and leaping pike, and steamers that flung hard bottles- at least bottles were certainly flung, and from steamers, so presumably by them; and about herons, and how particular they were whom they spoke to; and about adventures down drains, and night-fishings with Otter, or excursions far a-field with Badger.

Supper was a most cheerful meal; but very shortly afterwards a terribly sleepy Mole had to be escorted upstairs by his considerate host, to the best bedroom, where he soon laid his head on his pillow in great peace and contentment, knowing that his new- found friend the River was lapping the sill of his window.

This day was only the first of many similar ones for the emancipated Mole, each of them longer and full of interest as the ripening summer moved onward.

He learnt to swim and to row, and entered into the joy of running water; and with his ear to the reed-stems he caught, at intervals, something of what the wind went whispering so constantly among them.
RATTY, said the Mole suddenly, one bright summer morning, if you please, I want to ask you a favour. The Rat was sitting on the river bank, singing a little song. He had just composed it himself, so he was very taken up with it, and would not pay proper attention to Mole or anything else. Since early morning he had been swimming in the river, in company with his friends the ducks. And when the ducks stood on their heads suddenly, as ducks will, he would dive down and tickle their necks, just under where their chins would be if ducks had chins, till they were forced to come to the surface again in a hurry, spluttering and angry and shaking their feathers at him, for it is impossible to say quite all you feel when your head is under water.

At last they implored him to go away and attend to his own affairs and leave them to mind theirs. So the Rat went away, and sat on the river bank in the sun, and made up a song about them, which he called DUCKS DITTY. All along the backwater, Through the rushes tall, Ducks are a-dabbling, Up tails all! Ducks tails, drakes tails, Yellow feet a-quiver, Yellow bills all out of sight Busy in the river!

Slushy green undergrowth Where the roach swimHere we keep our larder, Cool and full and dim. Everyone for what he likes! We like to be Heads down, tails up, Dabbling free! High in the blue above Swifts whirl and call.

We are down a-dabbling Up tails all! I dont know that I think so very much of that little song, Rat, observed the Mole cautiously. He was no poet himself and didnt care who knew it; and he had a candid nature. Nor dont the ducks neither, replied the Rat cheerfully. They say, Why cant fellows be allowed to do what they like when they like and as they like, instead of other fellows sitting on banks and watching them all the time and making remarks and poetry and things about them? What nonsense it all is! Thats what the ducks say. So it is, so it is, said the Mole, with great heartiness.

No, it isnt! cried the Rat indignantly. Well then, it isnt, it isnt, replied the Mole soothingly. But what I wanted to ask you was, wont you take me to call on Mr. Toad? Ive heard so much about him, and I do so want to make his acquaintance. Why, certainly, said the good-natured Rat, jumping to his feet and dismissing poetry from his mind for the day. Get the boat out, and well paddle up there at once. Its never the wrong time to call on Toad. Early or late hes always the same fellow. Always good-tempered, always glad to see you, always sorry when you go! He must be a very nice animal, observed the Mole, as he got into the boat and took the sculls, while the Rat settled himself comfortably in the stern. He is indeed the best of animals, replied Rat. So simple, so good-natured, and so affectionate. Perhaps hes not very clever- we cant all be geniuses; and it may be that he is both boastful and conceited. But he has got some great qualities, has Toady.

Rounding a bend in the river, they came in sight of a handsome, dignified old house of mellowed red brick, with well-kept lawns reaching down to the waters edge. Theres Toad Hall, said the Rat; and that creek on the left, where the noticeboard says, Private. No landing allowed, leads to his boat-house, where well leave the boat. The stables are over there to the right. Thats the banqueting-hall youre looking at now- very old, that is. Toad is rather rich, you know, and this is really one of the nicest houses in these parts, though we never admit as much to Toad. They glided up the creek, and the Mole shipped his sculls as they passed into the shadow of a large boat- house. Here they saw many handsome boats, slung from the crossbeams or hauled up on a slip, but none in the water; and the place had an unused and a deserted air.

The Rat looked around him. I understand, said he. Boating is played out. Hes tired of it, and done with it. I wonder what new fad he has taken up now? Come along and lets look him up. We shall hear all about it quite soon enough. They disembarked, and strolled across the gay flower-decked lawns in search of Toad, whom they presently happened upon resting in a wicker garden-chair, with a pre- occupied expression of face, and a large map spread out on his knees. Hooray! he cried, jumping up on seeing them, this is splendid! He shook the paws of both of them warmly, never waiting for an introduction to the Mole. How kind of you! he went on, dancing round them. I was just going to send a boat down the river for you, Ratty, with strict orders that you were to be fetched up here at once, whatever you were doing. I want you badly- both of you. Now what will you take? Come inside and have something! You dont know how lucky it is, your turning up just now! Lets sit quiet a bit, Toady! said the Rat, throwing himself into an easy chair, while the Mole took another by the side of him and made some civil remark about Toads delightful residence. Finest house on the whole river, cried Toad boisterously. Or anywhere else, for that matter, he could not help adding. Here the Rat nudged the Mole. Unfortunately the Toad saw him do it, and turned very red. There was a moments painful silence. Then Toad burst out laughing. All right, Ratty, he said. Its only my way, you know. And its not such a very bad house, is it? You know you rather like it yourself. Now, look here. Lets be sensible. You are the very animals I wanted. Youve got to help me. Its most important! Its about your rowing, I suppose, said the Rat, with an innocent air. Youre getting on fairly well, though you splash a good bit still. With a great deal of patience, and any quantity of coaching, you may- O, pooh! boating! interrupted the Toad, in great disgust. Silly boyish amusement. Ive given that up long ago. Sheer waste of time, thats what it is. It makes me downright sorry to see you fellows, who ought to know better, spending all your energies in that aimless manner. No, Ive discovered the real thing, the only genuine occupation for a lifetime. I propose to devote the remainder of mine to it, and can only regret the wasted years that lie behind me, squandered in trivialities. Come with me, dear Ratty, and your amiable friend also, if he will be so very good, just as far as the stable-yard, and you shall see what you shall see! He led the way to the stable-yard accordingly, the Rat following with a most mistrustful expression; and there, drawn out of the coach-house into the open, they saw a gipsy caravan, shining with newness, painted a canary-yellow picked out with green, and red wheels.

There you are! cried the Toad, straddling and expanding himself. Theres real life for you, embodied in that little cart. The open road, the dusty highway, the heath, the common, the hedgerows, the rolling downs! Camps, villages, towns, cities! Here to- day, up and off to somewhere else to-morrow! Travel, change, interest, excitement! The whole world before you, and a horizon thats always changing! And mind! this is the very finest cart of its sort that was ever built, without any exception. Come inside and look at the arrangements. Planned em all myself, I did! The Mole was tremendously interested and excited, and followed him eagerly up the steps and into the interior of the caravan. The Rat only snorted and thrust his hands deep into his pockets, remaining where he was.

It was indeed very compact and comfortable. Little sleeping bunks- a little table that folded up against the wall- a cooking-stove, lockers, bookshelves, a birdcage with a bird in it; and pots, pans, jugs and kettles of every size and variety. All complete! said the Toad triumphantly, pulling open a locker. You seebiscuits, potted lobster, sardines- everything you can possibly want. Soda-water here- baccy there- letter-paper, bacon, jam, cards and dominoes- youll find, he continued, as they descended the steps again, youll find that nothing whatever has been forgotten, when we make our start this afternoon. I beg your pardon, said the Rat slowly, as he chewed a straw, but did I overhear you say something about we, and start, and this afternoon? Now, you dear good old Ratty, said Toad, imploringly, dont begin talking in that stiff and sniffy sort of way, because you know youve got to come. I cant possibly manage without you, so please consider it settled, and dont argue- its the one thing I cant stand. You surely dont mean to stick to your dull fusty old river all your life, and just live in a hole in a bank, and boat? I want to show you the world! Im going to make an animal of you, my boy! I dont care, said the Rat, doggedly. Im not coming, and thats flat. And I am going to stick to my old river, and live in a hole, and boat, as Ive always done. And whats more, Moles going to stick to me and do as I do, arent you, Mole? Of course I am, said the Mole, loyally. Ill always stick to you, Rat, and what you say is to be- has got to be. All the same, it sounds as if it might have been- well, rather fun, you know! he added, wistfully. Poor Mole! The Life Adventurous was so new a thing to him, and so thrilling; and this fresh aspect of it was so tempting; and he had fallen in love at first sight with the canary-coloured cart and all its little fitments.

The Rat saw what was passing in his mind, and wavered. He hated disappointing people, and he was fond of the Mole, and would do almost anything to oblige him. Toad was watching both of them closely. Come along in, and have some lunch, he said, diplomatically, and well talk it over. We neednt decide anything in a hurry. Of course, I dont really care. I only want to give pleasure to you fellows. Live for others! Thats my motto in life. During luncheon- which was excellent, of course, as everything at Toad Hall always was- the Toad simply let himself go. Disregarding the Rat, he proceeded to play upon the inexperienced Mole as on a harp. Naturally a voluble animal, and always mastered by his imagination, he painted the prospects of the trip and the joys of the open life and the roadside in such glowing colours that the Mole could hardly sit in his chair for

excitement. Somehow, it soon seemed taken for granted by all three of them that the trip was a settled thing; and the Rat, though still unconvinced in his mind, allowed his good-nature to over-ride his personal objections. He could not bear to disappoint his two friends, who were already deep in schemes and anticipations, planning out each days separate occupation for several weeks ahead.

When they were quite ready, the now triumphant Toad led his companions to the paddock and set them to capture the old grey horse, who, without having been consulted, and to his own extreme annoyance, had been told off by Toad for the dustiest job in this dusty expedition. He frankly preferred the paddock, and took a deal of catching. Meantime Toad packed the lockers still tighter with necessaries, and hung nosebags, nets of onions, bundles of hay, and baskets from the bottom of the cart. At last the horse was caught and harnessed, and they set off, all talking at once, each animal either trudging by the side of the cart or sitting on the shaft, as the humour took him. It was a golden afternoon. The smell of the dust they kicked up was rich and satisfying; out of thick orchards on either side the road, birds called and whistled to them cheerily; good-natured wayfarers, passing them, gave them Good-day, or stopped to say nice things about their beautiful cart; and rabbits, sitting at their front doors in the hedgerows, held up their forepaws, and said, O my! O my! O my! Late in the evening, tired and happy and miles from home, they drew up on a remote common far from habitations, turned the horse loose to graze, and ate their simple supper sitting on the grass by the side of the cart. Toad talked big about all he was going to do in the days to come, while stars grew fuller and larger all around them, and a yellow moon, appearing suddenly and silently from nowhere in particular, came to keep them company and listen to their talk. At last they turned in to their little bunks in the cart; and Toad, kicking out his legs, sleepily said, Well, good night, you fellows! This is the real life for a gentleman! Talk about your old river! I dont talk about my river, replied the patient Rat. You know I dont, Toad.

But I think about it, he added pathetically, in a lower tone: I think about it- all the time! The Mole reached out from under his blanket, felt for the Rats paw in the darkness, and gave it a squeeze. Ill do whatever you like, Ratty, he whispered. Shall we run away to-morrow morning, quite early- very early- and go back to our dear old hole on the river? No, no, well see it out, whispered back the Rat. Thanks awfully, but I ought to stick by Toad till this trip is ended. It wouldnt be safe for him to be left to himself. It wont take very long. His fads never do. Good night! The end was indeed nearer than even the Rat suspected.

After so much open air and excitement the Toad slept very soundly, and no amount of shaking could rouse him out of bed next morning. So the Mole and Rat turned to, quietly and manfully, and while the Rat saw to the horse, and lit a fire, and cleaned last nights cups and platters, and got things ready for breakfast, the Mole trudged off to the nearest village, a long way off, for milk and eggs and various necessaries the Toad had, of course, forgotten to provide. The hard work had all been done, and the two animals were resting, thoroughly exhausted, by the time Toad appeared on the scene, fresh and gay, remarking what a pleasant easy life it was they were all leading now, after the cares and worries and fatigues of housekeeping at home.

They had a pleasant ramble that day over grassy downs and along narrow bylanes, and camped as before, on a common, only this time the two guests took care that Toad should do his fair share of work. In consequence, when the time came for starting next morning, Toad was by no means so rapturous about the simplicity of the primitive life, and indeed attempted to resume his place in his bunk, whence he was hauled by force. Their way lay, as before, across country by narrow lanes, and it was not till the afternoon that they came out on the high-road, their first high-road; and there disaster, fleet and unforeseen, sprang out on themdisaster momentous indeed to their expedition, but simply overwhelming in its effect on the after-career of Toad.

They were strolling along the high-road easily, the Mole by the horses head, talking to him, since the horse had complained that he was being frightfully left out of it, and nobody considered him in the least; the Toad and the Water Rat walking behind the cart talking together- at least Toad was talking, and Rat was saying at intervals, Yes, precisely; and what did you say to him?- and thinking all the time of something very different, when far behind them they heard a faint warning hum, like the drone of a distant bee. Glancing back, they saw a small cloud of dust, with a dark centre of energy, advancing on them at incredible speed, while from out the dust a faint Poop- poop! wailed like an uneasy animal in pain. Hardly regarding it, they turned to resume their conversation, when in an instant (as it seemed) the peaceful scene was changed, and with a blast of wind and a whirl of sound that made them jump for the nearest ditch, It was on them! The Poop-poop rang with a brazen shout in their ears, they had a moments glimpse of an interior of glittering plate-glass and rich morocco and the magnificent motor-car, immense, breath-snatching, passionate, with its pilot tense and hugging his wheel, possessed all earth and air for the fraction of a second, flung an enveloping cloud of dust that blinded and enwrapped them utterly, and then dwindled to a speck in the far distance, changed back into a droning bee once more. The old grey horse, dreaming, as he plodded along, of his quiet paddock, in a new raw situation such as this simply abandoned himself to his natural emotions.

Rearing, plunging, backing steadily, in spite of all the Moles efforts at his head, and all the Moles lively language directed at his better feelings, he drove the cart backwards towards the deep ditch at the side of the road. It wavered an instant then there was a heartrending crash- and the canary-coloured cart, their pride and their joy, lay on its side in the ditch, an irredeemable wreck.

The Rat danced up and down in the road, simply transported with passion. You villains! he shouted, shaking both fists, You scoundrels, you highwaymen, you- you- road-hogs!- Ill have the law on you! Ill report you! Ill take you through all the Courts! His home-sickness had quite slipped away from him, and for the moment he was the skipper of the canary-coloured vessel driven on a shoal by the reckless jockeying of rival mariners, and he was trying to recollect all the fine and biting things he used to say to masters of steam-launches when their wash, as they drove too near the bank, used to flood his parlour-carpet at home. Toad sat straight down in the middle of the dusty road, his legs stretched out before him, and stared fixedly in the direction of the disappearing motor-car. He breathed short, his face wore a placid satisfied expression, and at intervals he faintly murmured

Poop-poop! The Mole was busy trying to quiet the horse, which he succeeded in doing after a time. Then he went to look at the cart, on its side in the ditch. It was indeed a sorry sight. Panels and windows smashed, axles hopelessly bent, one wheel off, sardine-tins scattered over the wide world, and the bird in the bird-cage sobbing pitifully and calling to be let out.

The Rat came to help him, but their united efforts were not sufficient to right the cart. Hi! Toad! they cried. Come and bear a hand, cant you! The Toad never answered a word, or budged from his seat in the road; so they went to see what was the matter with him. They found him in a sort of a trance, a happy smile on his face, his eyes still fixed on the dusty wake of their destroyer.

At intervals he was still heard to murmur Poop-poop! The Rat shook him by the shoulder. Are you coming to help us, Toad? he demanded sternly. Glorious, stirring sight! murmured Toad, never offering to move. The poetry of motion! The real way to travel! The only way to travel! Here to-day- in next week to- morrow! Villages skipped, towns and cities jumped- always somebody elses horizon! O bliss! O poop-poop! O my! O my! O stop being an ass, Toad! cried the Mole despairingly .

And to think I never knew! went on the Toad in a dreamy monotone. All those wasted years that lie behind me, I never knew, never even dreamt! But nowbut now that I know, now that I fully realise! O what a flowery track lies spread before me, henceforth! What dust-clouds shall spring up behind me as I speed on my reckless way! What carts I shall fling carelessly into the ditch in the wake of my magnificent onset! Horrid little carts- common carts- canary-coloured carts! What are we to do with him? asked the Mole of the Water Rat.

Nothing at all, replied the Rat firmly. Because there is really nothing to be done. You see, I know him from of old. He is now possessed. He has got a new craze, and it always takes him that way, in its first stage. Hell continue like that for days now, like an animal walking in a happy dream, quite useless for all practical purposes. Never mind him. Lets go and see what there is to be done about the cart. A careful inspection showed them that, even if they succeeded in righting it by themselves, the cart would travel no longer. The axles were in a hopeless state, and the missing wheel was shattered into pieces.

The Rat knotted the horses reins over his back and took him by the head, carrying the bird cage and its hysterical occupant in the other hand. Come on! he said grimly to the Mole. Its five or six miles to the nearest town, and we shall just have to walk it. The sooner we make a start the better. But what about Toad? asked the Mole anxiously, as they set off together.

We cant leave him here, sitting in the middle of the road by himself, in the distracted state hes in! Its not safe. Supposing another Thing were to come along? O, bother Toad, said the Rat savagely; Ive done with him! They had not proceeded very far on their way, however, when there was a pattering of feet behind them, and Toad caught them up and thrust a paw inside the elbow of each of them; still breathing short and staring into vacancy.

Now, look here, Toad! said the Rat sharply: as soon as we get to the town, youll have to go straight to the police-station, and see if they know anything about that motor-car and who it belongs to, and lodge a complaint against it. And then youll have to go to a blacksmiths or a wheelwrights and arrange for the cart to be fetched and mended and put to rights. Itll take time, but its not quite a hopeless smash. Meanwhile, the Mole and I will go to an inn and find comfortable rooms where we can stay till the carts ready, and till your nerves have recovered their shock. Police-station! Complaint! murmured Toad dreamily. Me complain of that beautiful, that heavenly vision that has been vouchsafed me! Mend the cart! Ive done with carts for ever. I never want to see the cart, or to hear of it, again. O, Ratty! You cant think how obliged I am to you for consenting to come on this trip! I wouldnt have gone without you, and then I might never have seen thatthat swan, that sunbeam, that thunderbolt! I might never have heard that entrancing sound, or smelt that bewitching smell! I owe it all to you, my best of friends! The Rat turned from him in despair. You see what it is? he said to the Mole, addressing him across Toads head: Hes quite hopeless. I give it up- when we get to the town well go to the railway station, and with luck we may pick up a train there thatll get us back to riverbank to-night. And if ever you catch me going a- pleasuring with this provoking animal again!- He snorted, and during the rest of that weary trudge addressed his remarks exclusively to Mole.

On reaching the town they went straight to the station and deposited Toad in the second-class waiting-room, giving a porter twopence to keep a strict eye on him. They then left the horse at an inn stable, and gave what directions they could about the cart and its contents. Eventually, a slow train having landed them at a station not very far from Toad Hall, they escorted the spell-bound, sleep-walking Toad to his door, put him inside it, and instructed his housekeeper to feed him, undress him, and put him to bed. Then they got out their boat from the boat-house, sculled down the river home, and at a very late hour sat down to supper in their own cosy riverside parlour, to the Rats great joy and contentment.

The following evening the Mole, who had risen late and taken things very easy all day, was sitting on the bank fishing, when the Rat, who had been looking up his friends and gossiping, came strolling along to find him. Heard the news? he said. Theres nothing else being talked about, all along the river bank. Toad went up to Town by an early train this morning. And he has ordered a large and very expensive motor-car.
THE Mole had long wanted to make the acquaintance of the Badger. He seemed, by all accounts, to be such an important personage and, though rarely visible, to make his unseen influence felt by everybody about the place. But whenever the Mole mentioned his wish to the Water Rat he always found himself put off. Its all right, the Rat would say. Badgerll turn up some day or other hes always turning up- and then Ill introduce you. The best of fellows! But you must not only take him as you find him, but when you find him. Couldnt you ask him here- dinner or something? said the Mole. He wouldnt come, replied the Rat simply. Badger hates Society, and invitations, and dinner, and all that sort of thing. Well, then, supposing we go and call on him? suggested the Mole.
O, Im sure he wouldnt like that at all, said the Rat, quite alarmed. Hes so very shy, hed be sure to be offended. Ive never even ventured to call on him at his own home myself, though I know him so well. Besides, we cant. Its quite out of the question, because he lives in the very middle of the Wild Wood.

Well, supposing he does, said the Mole. You told me the Wild Wood was all right, you know. O, I know, I know, so it is, replied the Rat evasively. But I think we wont go there just now. Not just yet. Its a long way, and he wouldnt be at home at this time of year anyhow, and hell be coming along some day, if youll wait quietly. The Mole had to be content with this. But the Badger never came along, and every day brought its amusements, and it was not till summer was long over, and cold and frost and miry ways kept them much indoors, and the swollen river raced past outside their windows with a speed that mocked at boating of any sort or kind, that he found his thoughts dwelling again with much persistence on the solitary grey Badger, who lived his own life by himself, in his hole in the middle of the Wild Wood.

In the winter time the Rat slept a great deal, retiring early and rising late. During his short day he sometimes scribbled poetry or did other small domestic jobs about the house; and, of course, there were always animals dropping in for a chat, and consequently there was a good deal of story-telling and comparing notes on the past summer and all its doings.

Such a rich chapter it had been, when one came to look back on it all! With illustrations so numerous and so very highly coloured! The pageant of the river bank had marched steadily along, unfolding itself in scene-pictures that succeeded each other in stately procession. Purple loosestrife arrived early, shaking luxuriant tangled locks along the edge of the mirror whence its own face laughed back at it. Willow-herb, tender and wistful, like a pink sunset cloud, was not slow to follow. Comfrey, the purple hand-in- hand with the white, crept forth to take its place in the line; and at last one morning the diffident and delaying dog-rose stepped delicately on the stage, and one knew, as if string-music had announced it in stately chords that strayed into a gavotte, that June at last was here. One member of the company was still awaited; the shepherd-boy for the nymphs to woo, the knight for whom the ladies waited at the window, the prince that

was to kiss the sleeping summer back to life and love. But when meadow-sweet, debonair and odorous in amber jerkin, moved graciously to his place in the group, then the play was ready to begin. And what a play it had been! Drowsy animals, snug in their holes while wind and rain were battering at their doors, recalled still keen mornings, an hour before sunrise, when the white mist, as yet undispersed, clung closely along the surface of the water; then the shock of the early plunge, the scamper along the bank, and the radiant transformation of earth, air, and water, when suddenly the sun was with them again, and grey was gold and colour was born and sprang out of the earth once more. They recalled the languorous siesta of hot mid-day, deep in green undergrowth, the sun striking through in tiny golden shafts and spots; the boating and bathing of the afternoon, the rambles along dusty lanes and through yellow cornfields; and the long, cool evening at last, when so many threads were gathered up, so many friendships rounded, and so many adventures planned for the morrow. There was plenty to talk about on those short winter days when the animals found themselves round the fire; still, the Mole had a good deal of spare time on his hands, and so one afternoon, when the Rat in his arm- chair before the blaze was alternately dozing and trying over rhymes that wouldnt fit, he formed the resolution to go out by himself and explore the Wild Wood, and perhaps strike up an acquaintance with Mr. Badger.

It was a cold still afternoon with a hard steely sky overhead, when he slipped out of the warm parlour into the open air. The country lay bare and entirely leafless around him, and he thought that he had never seen so far and so intimately into the insides of things as on that winter day when Nature was deep in her annual slumber and seemed to have kicked the clothes off. Copses, dells, quarries and all hidden places, which had been mysterious mines for exploration in leafy summer, now exposed themselves and their secrets pathetically, and seemed to ask him to overlook their shabby poverty for a while, till they could riot in rich masquerade as before, and trick and entice him with the old deceptions. It was pitiful in a way, and yet cheering- even exhilarating. He was glad that he liked the country undecorated, hard, and stripped of its finery. He had got down to the bare bones of it, and they were fine and strong and simple. He did not want the warm clover and the play of seeding grasses; the screens of quickset, the billowy drapery of beech and elm seemed best away; and with great cheerfulness of spirit he pushed on towards the Wild Wood, which lay before him low and threatening, like a black reef in some still southern sea.

There was nothing to alarm him at first entry. Twigs crackled under his feet, logs tripped him, funguses on stumps resembled caricatures, and startled him for the moment by their likeness to something familiar and far away; but that was all fun, and exciting. It led him on, and he penetrated to where the light was less, and trees crouched nearer and nearer, and holes made ugly mouths at him on either side. Everything was very still now. The dusk advanced on him steadily, rapidly, gathering in behind and before; and the light seemed to be draining away like flood-water.

Then the faces began.

It was over his shoulder, and indistinctly, that he first thought he saw a face; a little evil wedge-shaped face, looking out at him from a hole. When he turned and confronted it, the thing had vanished. He quickened his pace, telling himself cheerfully not to begin imagining things, or there would be simply no end to it. He passed another hole, and another, and another; and then- yes!- no!- yes! certainly a little narrow face, with hard eyes, had flashed up for an instant from a hole, and was gone. He hesitatedbraced himself up for an effort and strode on. Then suddenly, and as if it had been so all the time, every hole, far and near, and there were hundreds of them, seemed to possess its face, coming and going rapidly, all fixing on him glances of malice and hatred: all hard-eyed and evil and sharp.

If he could only get away from the holes in the banks, he thought, there would be no more faces. He swung off the path and plunged into the untrodden places of the wood. Then the whistling began. Very faint and shrill it was, and far behind him, when first he heard it; but somehow it made him hurry forward. Then, still very faint and shrill, it sounded far ahead of him, and made him hesitate and want to go back. As he halted in indecision it broke out on either side, and seemed to be caught up and passed on throughout the whole length of the wood to its farthest limit. They were up and alert and ready, evidently, whoever they were! And he- he was alone, and unarmed, and far from any help; and the night was closing in.

Then the pattering began. He thought it was only falling leaves at first, so slight and delicate was the sound of it. Then as it grew it took a regular rhythm, and he knew it for nothing else but the pat- pat-pat of little feet still a very long way off. Was it in front or behind? It seemed to be first one, and then the other, then both. It grew and it multiplied, till from every quarter as he listened anxiously, leaning this way and that, it seemed to be closing in on him. As he stood still to hearken, a rabbit came running hard towards him through the trees. He waited, expecting it to slacken pace, or to swerve from him into a different course. Instead, the animal almost brushed him as it dashed past, his face set and hard, his eyes staring. Get out of this, you fool, get out! the Mole heard him mutter as he swung round a stump and disappeared down a friendly burrow. The pattering increased till it sounded like sudden hail on the dry leaf-carpet spread around him. The whole wood seemed running now, running hard, hunting, chasing, closing in round something or- somebody? In panic, he began to run too, aimlessly, he knew not whither. He ran up against things, he fell over things and into things, he darted under things and dodged round things. At last he took refuge in the deep dark hollow of an old beech tree, which offered shelter, concealment- perhaps even safety, but who could tell? Anyhow, he was too tired to run any further, and could only snuggle down into the dry leaves which had drifted into the hollow and hope he was safe for a time. And as he lay there panting and trembling, and listened to the whistlings and the patterings outside, he knew it at last, in all its fullness, that dread thing which other little dwellers in field and hedgerow had encountered here, and

known as their darkest moment- that thing which the Rat had vainly tried to shield him from- the Terror of the Wild Wood! Meantime the Rat, warm and comfortable, dozed by his fireside. His paper of half- finished verses slipped from his knee, his head fell back, his mouth opened, and he wandered by the verdant banks of dream-rivers. Then a coal slipped, the fire crackled and sent up a spurt of flame, and he woke with a start. Remembering what he had been engaged upon, he reached down to the floor for his verses, pored over them for a minute, and then looked round for the Mole to ask him if he knew a good rhyme for something or other.

But the Mole was not there. He listened for a time. The house seemed very quiet. Then he called Moly! several times, and, receiving no answer, got up and went out into the hall. The Moles cap was missing from its accustomed peg. His goloshes, which always lay by the umbrella-stand, were also gone. The Rat left the house, and carefully examined the muddy surface of the ground outside, hoping to find the Moles tracks. There they were, sure enough. The goloshes were new, just bought for the winter, and the pimples on their soles were fresh and sharp. He could see the imprints of them in the mud, running along straight and purposeful, leading direct to the Wild Wood. The Rat looked very grave, and stood in deep thought for a minute or two. Then he reentered the house, strapped a belt round his waist, shoved a brace of pistols into it, took up a stout cudgel that stood in a corner of the hall, and set off for the Wild Wood at a smart pace. It was already getting towards dusk when he reached the first fringe of trees and plunged without hesitation into the wood, looking anxiously on either side for any sign of his friend. Here and there wicked little faces popped out of holes, but vanished immediately at sight of the valorous animal, his pistols, and the great ugly cudgel in his grasp; and the whistling and pattering, which he had heard quite plainly on his first entry, died away and ceased, and all was very still. He made his way manfully through the length of the wood, to its furthest edge; then, forsaking all paths, he set himself to traverse it, laboriously working over the whole ground, and all the time calling out cheerfully, Moly, Moly, Moly! Where are you? Its me- its old Rat! He had patiently hunted through the wood for an hour or more, when at last to his joy he heard a little answering cry. Guiding himself by the sound, he made his way through the gathering darkness to the foot of an old beech tree, with a hole in it, and from out of the hole came a feeble voice, saying Ratty! Is that really you? The Rat crept into the hollow, and there he found the Mole, exhausted and still trembling. O Rat! he cried, Ive been so frightened, you cant think! O, I quite understand, said the Rat soothingly. You shouldnt really have gone and done it, Mole. I did my best to keep you from it. We river-bankers, we hardly ever come here by ourselves. If we have to come, we come in couples, at least; then were generally all right. Besides, there are a hundred things one has to know, which we understand all about and you dont, as yet. I mean passwords, and signs, and sayings which have power and effect, and plants you

carry in your pocket, and verses you repeat, and dodges and tricks you practise; all simple enough when you know them, but theyve got to be known if youre small, or youll find yourself in trouble. Of course if you were Badger or Otter, it would be quite another matter. Surely the brave Mr. Toad wouldnt mind coming here by himself, would he? inquired the Mole.

Old Toad? said the Rat, laughing heartily. He wouldnt show his face here alone, not for a whole hatful of golden guineas, Toad wouldnt. The Mole was greatly cheered by the sound of the Rats careless laughter, as well as by the sight of his stick and his gleaming pistols, and he stopped shivering and began to feel bolder and more himself again.

Now then, said the Rat presently, we really must pull ourselves together and make a start for home while theres still a little light left. It will never do to spend the night here, you understand. Too cold, for one thing. Dear Ratty, said the poor Mole, Im dreadfully sorry, but Im simply dead beat and thats a solid fact. You must let me rest here a while longer, and get my strength back, if Im to get home at all. O, all right, said the good-natured Rat, rest away. Its pretty nearly pitch dark now, anyhow; and there ought to be a bit of a moon later. So the Mole got well into the dry leaves and stretched himself out, and presently dropped off into sleep, though of a broken and troubled sort; while the Rat covered himself up, too, as best he might, for warmth, and lay patiently waiting, with a pistol in his paw.

When at last the Mole woke up, much refreshed and in his usual spirits, the Rat said, Now then! Ill just take a look outside and see if everythings quiet, and then we really must be off. He went to the entrance of their retreat and put his head out. Then the Mole heard him saying quietly to himself, Hullo! hullo! here- is- a- go! Whats up, Ratty? asked the Mole.

Snow is up, replied the Rat briefly; or rather, down. Its snowing hard. The Mole came and crouched beside him, and, looking out, saw the wood that had been so dreadful to him in quite a changed aspect. Holes, hollows, pools, pitfalls, and other black menaces to the wayfarer were vanishing fast, and a gleaming carpet of faery was springing up everywhere, that looked too delicate to be trodden upon by rough feet. A fine powder filled the air and caressed the cheek with a tingle in its touch, and the black holes of the trees showed up in a light that seemed to come from below.

Well, well, it cant be helped, said the Rat, after pondering. We must make a start, and take our chance, I suppose. The worst of it is, I dont exactly know where we are. And now this snow makes everything look so very different. It did indeed. The Mole would not have known that it was the same wood.

However, they set out bravely, and took the line that seemed most promising, holding on to each other and pretending with invincible cheerfulness that they recognized an old friend in every fresh tree that grimly and silently greeted them, or saw openings, gaps, or paths with a familiar turn in them, in the monotony of white space and black tree-trunks that refused to vary.

An hour or two later- they had lost all count of time- they pulled up, dispirited, weary, and hopelessly at sea, and sat down on a fallen tree-trunk to recover their breath and

consider what was to be done. They were aching with fatigue and bruised with tumbles; they had fallen into several holes and got wet through; the snow was getting so deep that they could hardly drag their little legs through it, and the trees were thicker and more like each other than ever. There seemed to be no end to this wood, and no beginning, and no difference in it, and, worst of all, no way out.

We cant sit here very long, said the Rat. We shall have to make another push for it, and do something or other. The cold is too awful for anything, and the snow will soon be too deep for us to wade through. He peered about him and considered. Look here, he went on, this is what occurs to me. Theres a sort of dell down here in front of us, where the ground seems all hilly and humpy and hummocky. Well make our way down into that, and try and find some sort of shelter, a cave or hole with a dry floor to it, out of the snow and the wind, and there well have a good rest before we try again, for were both of us pretty dead beat. Besides, the snow may leave off, or something may turn up. So once more they got on their feet, and struggled down into the dell, where they hunted about for a cave or some corner that was dry and a protection from the keen wind and the whirling snow. They were investigating one of the hummocky bits the Rat had spoken of, when suddenly the Mole tripped up and fell forward on his face with a squeal.

O my leg! he cried. O my poor shin! and he sat up on the snow and nursed his leg in both his front paws. Poor old Mole! said the Rat kindly. You dont seem to be having much luck to-day, do you? Lets have a look at the leg. Yes, he went on, going down on his knees, to look, youve cut your shin, sure enough. Wait till I get at my handkerchief, and Ill tie it up for you. I must have tripped over a hidden branch or a stump, said the Mole miserably. O, my! O, my! Its a very clean cut, said the Rat, examining it again attentively. That was never done by a branch or a stump. Looks as if it was made by a sharp edge of something in metal. Funny! He pondered awhile, and examined the humps and slopes that surrounded them.

Well, never mind what done it, said the Mole, forgetting his grammar in his pain. It hurts just the same, whatever done it. But the Rat, after carefully tying up the leg with his handkerchief, had left him and was busy scraping in the snow. He scratched and shovelled and explored, all four legs working busily, while the Mole waited impatiently, remarking at intervals, O, come on, Rat! Suddenly the Rat cried Hooray! and then Hooray-oo-ray-oo-ray-oo-ray! and fell to executing a feeble jig in the snow.

What have you found, Ratty? asked the Mole, still nursing his leg. Come and see! said the delighted Rat, as he jigged on. The Mole hobbled up to the spot and had a good look. Well, he said at last, slowly, I see it right enough. Seen the same sort of thing before, lots of times. Familiar object, I call it. A door-scraper! Well, what of it? Why dance jigs around a door-scraper? But dont you see what it means, you- you dull-witted animal? cried the Rat impatiently.

Of course I see what it means, replied the Mole. It simply means that some very careless and forgetful person has left his door-scraper lying about in the middle of the

Wild Wood, just where its sure to trip everybody up. Very thoughtless of him, I call it. When I get home I shall go and complain about it to- to somebody or other, see if I dont! O, dear! O, dear! cried the Rat, in despair at his obtuseness. Here, stop arguing and come and scrape! And he set to work again and made the snow fly in all directions around him.

After some further toil his efforts were rewarded, and a very shabby door-mat lay exposed to view. There, what did I tell you? exclaimed the Rat in great triumph. Absolutely nothing whatever, replied the Mole, with perfect truthfulness.

Well now, he went on, you seem to have found another piece of domestic litter, done for and thrown away, and I suppose youre perfectly happy. Better go ahead and dance your jig round that if youve got to, and get it over, and then perhaps we can go on and not waste any more time over rubbish-heaps. Can we eat a doormat? Or sleep under a door-mat? Or sit on a door-mat and sledge home over the snow on it, you exasperating rodent? Do- you- mean- to- say, cried the excited Rat, that this door-mat doesnt tell you anything? Really, Rat, said the Mole, quite pettishly, I think wed had enough of this folly. Who ever heard of a door-mat telling anyone anything? They simply dont do it. They are not that sort at all. Door-mats know their place. Now look here, you- you thick-headed beast, replied the Rat, really angry, this must stop. Not another word, but scrape- scrape and scratch and dig and hunt round, especially on the sides of the hummocks, if you want to sleep dry and warm to-night, for its our last chance! The Rat attacked a snow-bank beside them with ardour, probing with his cudgel everywhere and then digging with fury; and the Mole scraped busily too, more to oblige the Rat than for any other reason, for his opinion was that his friend was getting light-headed.

Some ten minutes hard work, and the point of the Rats cudgel struck something that sounded hollow. He worked till he could get a paw through and feel; then called the Mole to come and help him. Hard at it went the two animals, till at last the result of their labours stood full in view of the astonished and hitherto incredulous Mole.

In the side of what had seemed to be a snow-bank stood a solid-looking little door, painted a dark green. An iron bell-pull hung by the side, and below it, on a small brass plate, neatly engraved in square capital letters, they could read by the aid of moonlight MR. BADGER.

The Mole fell backwards on the snow from sheer surprise and delight. Rat! he cried in penitence, youre a wonder! A real wonder, thats what you are. I see it all now! You argued it out, step by step, in that wise head of yours, from the very moment that I fell and cut my shin, and you looked at the cut, and at once your majestic mind said to itself, Door-scraper! And then you turned to and found the very door-scraper that done it! Did you stop there? No. Some people would have been quite satisfied; but not you. Your intellect went on working.

Let me only just find a door-mat, says you to yourself, and my theory is proved! And of course you found your door-mat. Youre so clever, I believe you could find anything you liked. Now, says you, that door exists, as plain as if I saw it. Theres

nothing else remains to be done but to find it! Well, Ive read about that sort of thing in books, but Ive never come across it before in real life. You ought to go where youll be properly appreciated. Youre simply wasted here, among us fellows. If I only had your head, Ratty-

But as you havent, interrupted the Rat, rather unkindly, I suppose youre going to sit on the snow all night and talk? Get up at once and hang on to that bellpull you see there, and ring hard, as hard as you can, while I hammer! While the Rat attacked the door with his stick, the Mole sprang up at the bellpull, clutched it and swung there, both feet well off the ground, and from quite a long way off they could faintly hear a deep-toned bell respond.
THEY waited patiently for what seemed a very long time, stamping in the snow to keep their feet warm. At last they heard the sound of slow shuffling footsteps approaching the door from the inside. It seemed, as the Mole remarked to the Rat, like some one walking in carpet slippers that were too large for him and down at heel; which was intelligent of Mole, because that was exactly what it was.

There was the noise of a bolt shot back, and the door opened a few inches, enough to show a long snout and a pair of sleepy blinking eyes. Now, the very next time this happens, said a gruff and suspicious voice, I shall be exceedingly angry. Who is it this time, disturbing people on such a night? Speak up! Oh, Badger, cried the Rat, let us in, please. Its me, Rat, and my friend Mole, and weve lost our way in the snow. What, Ratty, my dear little man! exclaimed the Badger, in quite a different voice. Come along in, both of you, at once. Why, you must be perished. Well I never! Lost in the snow! And in the Wild Wood, too, and at this time of night! But come in with you.

The two animals tumbled over each other in their eagerness to get inside, and heard the door shut behind them with great joy and relief. The Badger, who wore a long dressing-gown, and whose slippers were indeed very down at heel, carried a flat candlestick in his paw and had probably been on his way to bed when their summons sounded. He looked kindly down on them and patted both their heads. This is not the sort of night for small animals to be out, he said paternally. Im afraid youve been up to some of your pranks again, Ratty. But come along; come into the kitchen. Theres a first-rate fire there, and supper and everything. He shuffled on in front of them, carrying the light, and they followed him, nudging each other in an anticipating sort of way, down a long, gloomy, and, to tell the truth, decidedly shabby passage, into a sort of a central hall, out of which they could dimly see other long tunnel-like passages branching, passages mysterious and without apparent end. But there were doors in the hall as well- stout oaken comfortable-looking doors. One of

these the Badger flung open, and at once they found themselves in all the glow and warmth of a large fire-lit kitchen. The floor was well-worn red brick, and on the wide hearth burnt a fire of logs, between two attractive chimney-corners tucked away in the wall, well out of any suspicion of draught. A couple of high-backed settles, facing each other on either side of the fire, gave further sitting accommodations for the sociably disposed. In the middle of the room stood a long table of plain boards placed on trestles, with benches down each side. At one end of it, where an arm-chair stood pushed back, were spread the remains of the Badgers plain but ample supper. Rows of spotless plates winked from the shelves of the dresser at the far end of the room, and from the rafters overhead hung hams, bundles of dried herbs, nets of onions, and baskets of eggs. It seemed a place where heroes could fitly feast after victory, where weary harvesters could line up in scores along the table and keep their Harvest Home with mirth and song, or where two or three friends of simple tastes could sit about as they pleased and eat and smoke and talk in comfort and contentment.

The ruddy brick floor smiled up at the smoky ceiling; the oaken settles, shiny with long wear, exchanged cheerful glances with each other; plates on the dresser grinned at pots on the shelf, and the merry firelight flickered and played over everything without distinction.

The kindly Badger thrust them down on a settle to toast themselves at the fire, and bade them remove their wet coats and boots. Then he fetched them dressinggowns and slippers, and himself bathed the Moles shin with warm water and mended the cut with sticking-plaster till the whole thing was just as good as new, if not better. In the embracing light and warmth, warm and dry at last, with weary legs propped up in front of them, and a suggestive clink of plates being arranged on the table behind, it seemed to the storm-driven animals, now in safe anchorage, that the cold and trackless Wild Wood just left outside was miles and miles away, and all that they had suffered in it a half-forgotten dream.

When at last they were thoroughly toasted, the Badger summoned them to the table, where he had been busy laying a repast. They had felt pretty hungry before, but when they actually saw at last the supper that was spread for them, really it seemed only a question of what they should attack first where all was so attractive, and whether the other things would obligingly wait for them till they had time to give them attention. Conversation was impossible for a long time; and when it was slowly resumed, it was that regrettable sort of conversation that results from talking with your mouth full. The Badger did not mind that sort of thing at all, nor did he take any notice of elbows on the table, or everybody speaking at once. As he did not go into Society himself, he had got an idea that these things belonged to the things that didnt really matter. (We know of course that he was wrong, and took too narrow a view; because they do matter very much, though it would take too long to explain why.) He sat in his arm-chair at the head of the table, and nodded gravely at intervals as the animals told their story; and he did not seem surprised or shocked at anything, and he never said, I told you so, or, Just what I always said, or remarked that they ought to have done so-and-so, or ought not to have done something else. The Mole began to feel very friendly towards him.

When supper was really finished at last, and each animal felt that his skin was now as tight as was decently safe, and that by this time he didnt care a hang for anybody or anything, they gathered round the glowing embers of the great wood fire, and thought how jolly it was to be sitting up so late, and so independent, and so full; and after they had chatted for a time about things in general, the Badger said heartily, Now then! tell us the news from your part of the world. Hows old Toad going on? Oh, from bad to worse, said the Rat gravely, while the Mole, cocked up on a settle and basking in the firelight, his heels higher than his head, tried to look properly mournful. Another smash-up only last week, and a bad one. You see, he will insist on driving himself, and hes hopelessly incapable. If hed only employ a decent, steady, well-trained animal, pay him good wages, and leave everything to him, hed get on all right. But no; hes convinced hes a heaven-born driver, and nobody can teach him anything; and all the rest follows. How many has he had? inquired the Badger gloomily.

Smashes, or machines? asked the Rat. Oh, well, after all, its the same thingwith Toad. This is the seventh. As for the others- you know that coach-house of his? Well, its piled up- literally piled up to the roof- with fragments of motorcars, none of them bigger than your hat! That accounts for the other six- so far as they can be accounted for. Hes been in hospital three times, put in the Mole; and as for the fines hes had to pay, its simply awful to think of. Yes, and thats part of the trouble, continued the Rat. Toads rich, we all know; but hes not a millionaire. And hes a hopelessly bad driver, and quite regardless of law and order. Killed or ruined- its got to be one of the two things, sooner or later. Badger! were his friends- oughtnt we to do something?

The Badger went through a bit of hard thinking. Now look here! he said at last, rather severely; of course you know I cant do anything now? His two friends assented, quite understanding his point. No animal, according to the rules of animal-etiquette, is ever expected to do anything strenuous, or heroic, or even moderately active during the off- season of winter. All are sleepysome actually asleep. All are weather-bound, more or less; and all are resting from arduous days and nights, during which every muscle in them has been severely tested, and every energy kept at full stretch.

Very well then! continued the Badger. But, when once the year has really turned, and the nights are shorter, and halfway through them one rouses and feels fidgety and wanting to be up and doing by sunrise, if not before- you know!- Both animals nodded gravely. They knew!

Well, then, went on the Badger, we- that is, you and me and our friend the Mole here- well take Toad seriously in hand. Well stand no nonsense whatever. Well bring him back to reason, by force if need be. Well make him be a sensible Toad. Well- youre asleep, Rat! Not me! said the Rat, waking up with a jerk.

Hes been asleep two or three times since supper, said the Mole, laughing. He himself was feeling quite wakeful and even lively, though he didnt know why. The reason was, of course, that be being naturally an underground animal by birth and breeding, the situation of Badgers house exactly suited him and made him feel at home; while the Rat, who slept every night in a bedroom the windows of which opened on a breezy river, naturally felt the atmosphere still and oppressive.

Well, its time we were all in bed, said the Badger, getting up and fetching flat candlesticks. Come along, you two, and Ill show you your quarters. And take your time tomorrow morning- breakfast at any hour you please! He conducted the two animals to a long room that seemed half bedchamber and half lot. The Badgers winter stores, which indeed were visible everywhere, took up half the room- piles of apples, turnips, and potatoes, baskets full of nuts, and jars of honey; but the two little white beds on the remainder of the floor looked soft and inviting, and the linen on them, though coarse, was clean and smelt beautifully of lavender; and the Mole and the Water Rat, shaking off their garments in some thirty seconds, tumbled in between the sheets in great joy and contentment.

In accordance with the kindly Badgers injunctions, the two tired animals came down to breakfast very late next morning, and found a bright fire burning in the kitchen, and two young hedgehogs sitting on a bench at the table, eating oatmeal porridge out of wooden bowls. The hedgehogs dropped their spoons, rose to their feet, and ducked their heads respectfully as the two entered.

There, sit down, sit down, said the Rat pleasantly, and go on with your porridge. Where have you youngsters come from? Lost your way in the snow, I suppose? Yes, please, sir, said the elder of the two hedgehogs respectfully. Me and little Billy here, we was trying to find our way to school- mother would have us go, was the weather ever so- and of course we lost ourselves, sir, and Billy he got frightened and took and cried, being young and faint-hearted. And at last we happened up against Mr. Badgers back door, and made so bold as to knock, sir, for Mr. Badger hes a kind- hearted gentleman, as everyone knows- I understand, said the Rat, cutting himself some rashers from a side of bacon, while the Mole dropped some eggs into a saucepan. And whats the weather like outside? You neednt sir me quite so much, he added. O, terrible bad, sir, terrible deep the snow is, said the hedgehog. No getting out for the likes of you gentlemen to-day. Wheres Mr. Badger? inquired the Mole, as he warmed the coffee-pot before the fire.

The masters gone into his study, sir, replied the hedgehog, and he said as how he was going to be particular busy this morning, and on no account was he to be disturbed. This explanation, of course, was thoroughly understood by every one present.

The fact is, as already set forth, when you live a life of intense activity for six months in the year, and of comparative or actual somnolence for the other six, during the latter period you cannot be continually pleading sleepiness when there are people about or things to be done. The excuse gets monotonous. The animals well knew that Badger, having eaten a hearty breakfast, had retired to his study and settled himself in an arm- chair with his legs up on another and a red cotton handkerchief over his face, and was being busy in the usual way at this time of the year.

The front-door bell clanged loudly, and the Rat, who was very greasy with buttered toast, sent Billy, the smaller hedgehog, to see who it might be. There was a sound of much stamping in the hall, and presently Billy returned in front of the Otter, who threw himself on the Rat with an embrace and a shout of affectionate greeting.

Get off! spluttered the Rat, with his mouth full.

Thought I should find you here all right, said the Otter cheerfully. They were all in a great state of alarm along River Bank when I arrived this morning. Rat never been home all night- nor Mole either- something dreadful must have happened, they said; and the snow had covered up all your tracks, of course. But I knew that when people were in any fix they mostly went to Badger, or else Badger got to know of it somehow, so I came straight off here, through the Wild Wood and the snow! My! it was fine, coming through the snow as the red sun was rising and showing against the black tree-trunks! As you went along in the stillness, every now and then masses of snow slid off the branches suddenly with a flop! making you jump and run for cover. Snow-castles and snow-caverns had sprung up out of nowhere in the night- and snow bridges, terraces, ramparts- I could have stayed and played with them for hours. Here and there great branches had been torn away by the sheer weight of the snow, and robins perched and hopped on them in their perky conceited way, just as if they had done it themselves. A ragged string of wild geese passed overhead, high on the grey sky, and a few rooks whirled over the trees, inspected, and flapped off homewards with a disgusted expression; but I met no sensible being to ask the news of. About halfway across I came on a rabbit sitting on a stump, cleaning his silly face with his paws.

He was a pretty scared animal when I crept up behind him and placed a heavy fore- paw on his shoulder. I had to cuff his head once or twice to get any sense out of it at all. At last I managed to extract from him that Mole had been seen in the Wild Wood last night by one of them. It was the talk of the burrows, he said, how Mole, Mr. Rats particular friend, was in a bad fix; how he had lost his way, and They were up and out hunting, and were chivvying him round and round.

Then why didnt any of you do something? I asked. You maynt be blest with brains, but there are hundreds and hundreds of you, big, stout fellows, as fat as butter, and your burrows running in all directions, and you could have taken him in and made him safe and comfortable, or tried to, at all events. What, us? he merely said: do something? us rabbits? So I cuffed him again and left him.

There was nothing else to be done. At any rate, I had learnt something; and if I had had the luck to meet any of Them Id have learnt something more- or they would. Werent you at all- er- nervous? asked the Mole, some of yesterdays terror coming back to him at the mention of the Wild Wood.

Nervous? The Otter showed a gleaming set of strong white teeth as he laughed. Id give em nerves if any of them tried anything on with me. Here, Mole, fry me some slices of ham, like the good little chap you are. Im frightfully hungry, and Ive got any amount to say to Ratty here. Havent seen him for an age. So the good-natured Mole, having cut some slices of ham, set the hedgehogs to fry it, and returned to his own breakfast, while the Otter and the Rat, their heads together, eagerly talked river-shop, which is long shop and talk that is endless, running on like the babbling river itself.

A plate of fried ham had just been cleared and sent back for more, when the Badger entered, yawning and rubbing his eyes, and greeted them all in his quiet, simple way, with kind enquiries for every one. It must be getting on for luncheon time, he remarked to the Otter. Better stop and have it with us. You must be hungry, this cold

morning. Rather! replied the Otter, winking at the Mole. The sight of these greedy young hedgehogs stuffing themselves with fried ham makes me feel positively famished. The hedgehogs, who were just beginning to feel hungry again after their porridge, and after working so hard at their frying, looked timidly up at Mr. Badger, but were too shy to say anything.

Here, you two youngsters be off home to your mother, said the Badger kindly. Ill send some one with you to show you the way. You wont want any dinner to-day, Ill be bound. He gave them sixpence apiece and a pat on the head, and they went off with much respectful swinging of caps and touching of forelocks.

Presently they all sat down to luncheon together. The Mole found himself placed next to Mr. Badger, and, as the other two were still deep in river-gossip from which nothing could divert them, he took the opportunity to tell Badger how comfortable and home- like it all felt to him. Once well underground, he said, you know exactly where you are. Nothing can happen to you, and nothing can get at you. Youre entirely your own master, and you dont have to consult anybody or mind what they say. Things go on all the same overhead, and you let em, and dont bother about em. When you want to, up you go, and there the things are, waiting for you. The Badger simply beamed on him. Thats exactly what I say, he replied.

Theres no security, or peace and tranquillity, except underground. And then, if your ideas get larger and you want to expand- why, a dig and a scrape, and there you are! If you feel your house is a bit too big, you stop up a hole or two, and there you are again! No builders, no tradesmen, no remarks passed on you by fellows looking over your wall, and, above all, no weather. Look at Rat, now. A couple of feet of flood water, and hes got to move into hired lodgings; uncomfortable, inconveniently situated, and horribly expensive. Take Toad. I say nothing against Toad Hall; quite the best house in these parts, as a house. But supposing a fire breaks out- wheres Toad? Supposing tiles are blown off, or walls sink or crack, or windows get broken- wheres Toad? Supposing the rooms are draughty- I hate a draught myself- wheres Toad? No, up and out of doors is good enough to roam about and get ones living in; but underground to come back to at last- thats my idea of home! The Mole assented heartily; and the Badger in consequence got very friendly with him. When lunch is over, he said, Ill take you all round this little place of mine. I can see youll appreciate it. You understand what domestic architecture ought to be, you do. After luncheon, accordingly, when the other two had settled themselves into the chimney-corner and had started a heated argument on the subject of eels, the Badger lighted a lantern and bade the Mole follow him. Crossing the hall, they passed down one of the principal tunnels, and the wavering light of the lantern gave glimpses on either side of rooms both large and small, some mere cupboards, others nearly as broad and imposing as Toads dining-hall. A narrow passage at right angles led them into another corridor, and here the same thing was repeated. The Mole was staggered at the size, the extent, the ramifications of it all; at the length of the dim passages, the solid vaultings of the crammed storechambers, the masonry everywhere, the pillars, the arches, the pavements. How on earth, Badger, he said at last, did you ever find time and strength to do all this? Its astonishing! It

would be astonishing indeed, said the Badger simply, if I had done it. But as a matter of fact I did none of it- only cleaned out the passages and chambers, as far as I had need of them. Theres lots more of it, all round about. I see you dont understand, and I must explain it to you. Well, very long ago, on the spot where the Wild Wood waves now, before ever it had planted itself and grown up to what it now is, there was a city- a city of people, you know. Here, where we are standing, they lived, and walked, and talked, and slept, and carried on their business.

Here they stabled their horses and feasted, from here they rode out to fight or drove out to trade. They were a powerful people, and rich, and great builders. They built to last, for they thought their city would last for ever. But what has become of them all? asked the Mole.

Who can tell? said the Badger. People come- they stay for a while, they flourish, they build- and they go. It is their way. But we remain. There were badgers here, Ive been told, long before that same city ever came to be. And now there are badgers here again. We are an enduring lot, and we may move out for a time, but we wait, and are patient, and back we come. And so it will ever be. Well, and when they went at last, those people? said the Mole.

When they went, continued the Badger, the strong winds and persistent rains took the matter in hand, patiently, ceaselessly, year after year. Perhaps we badgers too, in our small way, helped a little- who knows? It was all down, down, down, gradually- ruin and levelling and disappearance. Then it was all up, up, up, gradually, as seeds grew to saplings, and saplings to forest trees, and bramble and fern came creeping in to help. Leaf-mould rose and obliterated, streams in their winter freshets brought sand and soil to clog and to cover, and in course of time our home was ready for us again, and we moved in. Up above us, on the surface, the same thing happened. Animals arrived, liked the look of the place, took up their quarters, settled down, spread, and flourished. They didnt bother themselves about the past- they never do; theyre too busy. The place was a bit humpy and hillocky, naturally, and full of holes; but that was rather an advantage. And they dont bother about the future, either- the future when perhaps the people will move in again- for a time- as may very well be. The Wild Wood is pretty well populated by now; with all the usual lot, good, bad, and indifferent- I name no names. It takes all sorts to make a world. But I fancy you know something about them yourself by this time. I do indeed, said the Mole, with a slight shiver.

Well, well, said the Badger, patting him on the shoulder, it was your first experience of them, you see. Theyre not so bad really; and we must all live and let live. But Ill pass the word around to-morrow, and I think youll have no further trouble. Any friend of mine walks where he likes in this country, or Ill know the reason why! When they got back to the kitchen again, they found the Rat walking up and down, very restless. The underground atmosphere was oppressing him and getting on his nerves, and he seemed really to be afraid that the river would run away if he wasnt there to look after it. So he had his overcoat on, and his pistols thrust into his belt again. Come along, Mole, he said anxiously, as soon as he caught sight of them. We must get off while its daylight. Dont want to spend another night in the Wild Wood again.

Itll be all right, my fine fellow, said the Otter. Im coming along with you, and I know every path blindfold; and if theres a head that needs to be punched, you can confidently rely upon me to punch it. You really neednt fret, Ratty, added the Badger placidly. My passages run further than you think, and Ive bolt-holes to the edge of the wood in several directions, though I dont care for everybody to know about them. When you really have to go, you shall leave by one of my short cuts. Meantime, make yourself easy, and sit down again. The Rat was nevertheless still anxious to be off and attend to his river, so the Badger, taking up his lantern again, led the way along a damp and airless tunnel that wound and dipped, part vaulted, part hewn through solid rock, for a weary distance that seemed to be miles. At last daylight began to show itself confusedly through tangled growth overhanging the mouth of the passage; and the Badger, bidding them a hasty good-bye, pushed them hurriedly through the opening, made everything look as natural as possible again, with creepers, brushwood, and dead leaves, and retreated.

They found themselves standing on the very edge of the Wild Wood. Rocks and brambles and tree-roots behind them, confusedly heaped and tangled; in front, a great space of quiet fields, hemmed by lines of hedges black on the snow, and, far ahead, a glint of the familiar old river, while the wintry sun hung red and low on the horizon. The Otter, as knowing all the paths, took charge of the party, and they trailed out on a bee-line for a distant stile. Pausing there a moment and looking back, they saw the whole mass of the Wild Wood, dense, menacing, compact, grimly set in vast white surroundings; simultaneously they turned and made swiftly for home, for firelight and the familiar things it played on, for the voice, sounding cheerily outside their window, of the river that they knew and trusted in all its moods, that never made them afraid with any amazement.

As he hurried along, eagerly anticipating the moment when he would be at home again among the things he knew and liked, the Mole saw clearly that he was an animal of tilled field and hedge-row, linked to the ploughed furrow, the frequented pasture, the lane of evening lingerings, the cultivated garden-plot. For others the asperities, the stubborn endurance, or the clash of actual conflict, that went with Nature in the rough; he must be wise, must keep to the pleasant places in which his lines were laid and which held adventure enough, in their way, to last for a lifetime.
THE sheep ran huddling together against the hurdles, blowing out thin nostrils and stamping with delicate fore-feet, their heads thrown back and a light steam rising from the crowded sheep-pen into the frosty air, as the two animals hastened by in high spirits, with much chatter and laughter. They were returning across country after a long days outing with Otter, hunting and exploring on the wide uplands where certain streams tributary to their own River had their first small beginnings; and the shades of the short winter day were closing in on them, and they had still some distance to go. Plodding at random across the plough, they had heard the sheep and had made for them; and now, leading from the sheep-pen, they found a beaten track that made walking a lighter business, and responded, moreover, to that small inquiring something which all animals carry inside them, saying unmistakably, Yes, quite right; this leads home! It looks as if we were coming to a village, said the Mole somewhat dubiously, slackening his pace, as the track, that had in time become a path and then had developed into a lane, now handed them over to the charge of a well-metalled road. The animals did not hold with villages, and their own highways, thickly frequented as they were, took an independent course, regardless of church, post office, or public-house.

Oh, never mind! said the Rat. At this season of the year theyre all safe indoors by this time, sitting round the fire; men, women, and children, dogs and cats and all. We shall slip through all right, without any bother or unpleasantness, and we can have a look at them through their windows if you like, and see what theyre doing. The rapid nightfall of mid-December had quite beset the little village as they approached it on soft feet over a first thin fall of powdery snow. Little was visible but squares of a dusky orange-red on either side of the street, where the firelight or lamplight of each cottage overflowed through the casements into the dark world without. Most of the low latticed windows were innocent of blinds, and to the lookers-in from outside, the inmates, gathered round the tea-table, absorbed in handiwork, or talking with laughter and gesture, had each that happy grace which is the last thing the skilled actor shall capture- the natural grace which goes with perfect unconsciousness of observation. Moving at will from one theater to another, the two spectators, so far from home themselves, had something of wistfulness in their eyes as they watched a cat being stroked, a sleepy child picked up and huddled off to bed, or a tired man stretch and knock out his pipe on the end of a smoldering log.

But it was from one little window, with its blind drawn down, a mere blank transparency on the night, that the sense of home and the little curtained world within walls- the larger stressful world of outside Nature shut out and forgottenmost pulsated. Close against the white blind hung a bird-cage, clearly silhouetted, every wire, perch, and appurtenance distinct and recognizable, even to yesterdays dull-edged lump of sugar. On the middle perch the fluffy occupant, head tucked well into feathers, seemed so near to them as to be easily stroked, had they tried; even the delicate tips of his

plumped-out plumage pencilled plainly on the illuminated screen. As they looked, the sleepy little fellow stirred uneasily, woke, shook himself, and raised his head. They could see the gape of his tiny beak as he yawned in a bored sort of way, looked round, and then settled his head into his back again, while the ruffled feathers gradually subsided into perfect stillness.

Then a gust of bitter wind took them in the back of the neck, a small sting of frozen sleet on the skin woke them as from a dream, and they knew their toes to be cold and their legs tired, and their own home distant a weary way. Once beyond the village, where the cottages ceased abruptly, on either side of the road they could smell through the darkness the friendly fields again; and they braced themselves for the last long stretch, the home stretch, the stretch that we know is bound to end, some time, in the rattle of the door-latch, the sudden firelight, and the sight of familiar things greeting us as long-absent travelers from far over-sea. They plodded along steadily and silently, each of them thinking his own thoughts. The Moles ran a good deal on supper, as it was pitch-dark, and it was all a strange country for him as far as he knew, and he was following obediently in the wake of the Rat, leaving the guidance entirely to him. As for the Rat, he was walking a little way ahead, as his habit was, his shoulders humped, his eyes fixed on the straight grey road in front of him; so he did not notice poor Mole when suddenly the summons reached him, and took him like an electric shock.

We others, who have long lost the more subtle of the physical senses, have not even proper terms to express an animals inter-communications with his surroundings, living or otherwise, and have only the word smell, for instance, to include the whole range of delicate thrills which murmur in the nose of the animal night and day, summoning, warning, inciting, repelling. It was one of these mysterious fairy calls from out the void that suddenly reached Mole in the darkness, making him tingle through and through with its very familiar appeal, even while yet he could not clearly remember what it was. He stopped dead in his tracks, his nose searching hither and thither in its efforts to recapture the fine filament, the telegraphic current, that had so strongly moved him. A moment, and he had caught it again; and with it this time came recollection in fullest flood.

Home! That was what they meant, those caressing. appeals, those soft touches wafted through the air, those invisible little hands pulling and tugging, all one way! Why, it must be quite close by him at that moment, his old home that he had hurriedly forsaken and never sought again, that day when he first found the river! And now it was sending out its scouts and its messengers to capture him and bring him in. Since his escape on that bright morning he had hardly given it a thought, so absorbed had he been in his new life, in all its pleasures, its surprises, its fresh and captivating experiences. Now, with a rush of old memories, how clearly it stood up before him, in the darkness! Shabby indeed, and small and poorly furnished, and yet his, the home he had made for himself, the home he had been so happy to get back to after his days work.

And the home had been happy with him, too, evidently, and was missing him, and wanted him back, and was telling him so, through his nose, sorrowfully, reproachfully,

but with no bitterness or anger; only with plaintive reminder that it was there, and wanted him. The call was clear, the summons was plain. He must obey it instantly, and go. Ratty! he called, full of joyful excitement, hold on! Come back! I want you, quick! Oh, come along, Mole, do! replied the Rat cheerfully, still plodding along.

Please stop, Ratty! pleaded the poor Mole, in anguish of heart. You dont understand! Its my home, my old home! Ive just come across the smell of it, and its close by here, really quite close. And I must go to it, I must, I must! Oh, come back, Ratty! Please, please come back! The Rat was by this time very far ahead, too far to hear clearly what the Mole was calling, too far to catch the sharp note of painful appeal in his voice. And he was much taken up with the weather, for he too could smell something- something suspiciously like approaching snow.

Mole, we mustnt stop now, really! he called back. Well come for it to-morrow, whatever it is youve found. But I darent stop now- its late, and the snows coming on again, and Im not sure of the way! And I want your nose, Mole, so come on quick, theres a good fellow! And the Rat pressed forward on his way without waiting for an answer.

Poor Mole stood alone in the road, his heart torn asunder, and a big sob gathering, gathering, somewhere low down inside him, to leap up to the surface presently, he knew, in passionate escape. But even under such a test as this his loyalty to his friend stood firm. Never for a moment did he dream of abandoning him.

Meanwhile, the wafts from his old home pleaded, whispered, conjured, and finally claimed him imperiously. He dared not tarry longer within their magic circle. With a wrench that tore his very heartstrings he set his face down the road and followed submissively in the track of the Rat, while faint, thin little smells, still dogging his retreating nose, reproached him for his new friendship and his callous forgetfulness. With an effort he caught up to the unsuspecting Rat, who began chattering cheerfully about what they would do when they got back, and how jolly a fire of logs in the parlour would be, and what a supper he meant to eat; never noticing his companions silence and distressful state of mind. At last, however, when they had gone some considerable way further, and were passing some tree-stumps at the edge of a copse that bordered the road, he stopped and said kindly, Look here, Mole old chap, you seem dead tired. No talk left in you, and your feet dragging like lead. Well sit down here for a minute and rest. The snow has held off so far, and the best part of our journey is over.

The Mole subsided forlornly on a tree-stump and tried to control himself, for he felt it surely coming. The sob he had fought with so long refused to be beaten. Up and up, it forced its way to the air, and then another, and another, and others thick and fast; till poor Mole at last gave up the struggle, and cried freely and helplessly and openly, now that he knew it was all over and he had lost what he could hardly be said to have found.

The Rat, astonished and dismayed at the violence of Moles paroxysm of grief, did not dare to speak for a while. At last he said, very quietly and sympathetically, What is it, old fellow? Whatever can be the matter? Tell us your trouble, and let me see what I can

do. Poor Mole found it difficult to get any words out between the upheavals of his chest that followed one upon another so quickly and held back speech and choked it as it came. I know its a- shabby, dingy little place, he sobbed forth at last, brokenly: not like- your cosy quarters- or Toads beautiful hall- or Badgers great house- but it was my own little home- and I was fond of it- and I went away and forgot all about it- and then I smelt it suddenly- on the road, when I called and you wouldnt listen, Rat- and everything came back to me with a rush- and I wanted it!- O dear, O dear!- and when you wouldnt turn back, Ratty- and I had to leave it, though I was smelling it all the time- I thought my heart would break.We might have just gone and had one look at it, Ratty- only one look- it was close by- but you wouldnt turn back, Ratty, you wouldnt turn back! O dear, O dear!

Recollection brought fresh waves of sorrow, and sobs again took full charge of him, preventing further speech. The Rat stared straight in front of him, saying nothing, only patting Mole gently on the shoulder. After a time he muttered gloomily, I see it all now! What a pig I have been! A pig- thats me! just a pig- a plain pig! He waited till Moles sobs became gradually less stormy and more rhythmical; he waited till at last sniffs were frequent and sobs only intermittent. Then he rose from his seat, and, remarking carelessly, Well, now wed really better be getting on, old chap! set off up the road again, over the toilsome way they had come.

Wherever are you (hic) going to (hic), Ratty? cried the tearful Mole, looking up in alarm. Were going to find that home of yours, old fellow, replied the Rat pleasantly; so you had better come along, for it will take some finding, and we shall want your nose. Oh, come back, Ratty, do! cried the Mole, getting up and hurrying after him.

Its no good, I tell you! Its too late, and too dark, and the place is too far off, and the snows coming! And- and I never meant to let you know I was feeling that way about it- it was all an accident and a mistake! And think of River Bank, and your supper! Hang River Bank, and supper too! said the Rat heartily. I tell you, Im going to find this place now, if I stay out all night. So cheer up, old chap, and take my arm, and well very soon be back there again. Still snuffling, pleading, and reluctant, Mole suffered himself to be dragged back along the road by his imperious companion, who by a flow of cheerful talk and anecdote endeavoured to beguile his spirits back and make the weary way seem shorter. When at last it seemed to the Rat that they must be nearing that part of the road where the Mole had been held up, he said, Now, no more talking. Business! Use your nose, and give your mind to it. They moved on in silence for some little way, when suddenly the Rat was conscious, through his arm that was linked in Moles, of a faint sort of electric thrill that was passing down that animals body. Instantly he disengaged himself, fell back a pace, and waited, all attention.

The signals were coming through! Mole stood a moment rigid, while his uplifted nose, quivering slightly, felt the air. Then a short, quick run forward- a fault- a check- a try back; and then a slow, steady, confident advance.

The Rat, much excited, kept close to his heels as the Mole, with something of the air of a sleep-walker, crossed a dry ditch, scrambled through a hedge, and nosed his way over a field open and trackless and bare in the faint starlight. Suddenly, without giving warning, he dived; but the Rat was on the alert, and promptly followed him down the tunnel to which his unerring nose had faithfully led him.

It was close and airless, and the earthy smell was strong, and it seemed a long time to Rat ere the passage ended and he could stand erect and stretch and shake himself. The Mole struck a match, and by its light the Rat saw that they were standing in an open space, neatly swept and sanded underfoot, and directly facing them was Moles little front door, with Mole End painted, in Gothic lettering, over the bell-pull at the side. Mole reached down a lantern from a nail on the wall and lit it, and the Rat, looking round him, saw that they were in a sort of fore-court. A garden-seat stood on one side of the door, and on the other a roller; for the Mole, who was a tidy animal when at home, could not stand having his ground kicked up by other animals into little runs that ended in earth-heaps. On the walls hung wire baskets with ferns in them, alternating with brackets carrying plaster statuary- Garibaldi, and the infant Samuel, and Queen Victoria, and other heroes of modern Italy. Down on one side of the fore- court ran a skittle-alley, with benches along it and little wooden tables marked with rings that hinted at beer-mugs. In the middle was a small round pond containing gold- fish and surrounded by a cockle-shell border.

Out of the centre of the pond rose a fanciful erection clothed in more cockleshells and topped by a large silvered glass ball that reflected everything all wrong and had a very pleasing effect. Moles face beamed at the sight of all these objects so dear to him, and he hurried Rat through the door, lit a lamp in the hall, and took one glance round his old home. He saw the dust lying thick on everything, saw the cheerless, deserted look of the long- neglected house, and its narrow, meagre dimensions, its worn and shabby contents- and collapsed again on a hall-chair, his nose to his paws. O Ratty! he cried dismally, why ever did I do it? Why did I bring you to this poor, cold little place, on a night like this, when you might have been at River Bank by this time, toasting your toes before a blazing fire, with all your own nice things about you! The Rat paid no heed to his doleful self-reproaches. He was running here and there, opening doors, inspecting rooms and cupboards, and lighting lamps and candles and sticking them up everywhere. What a capital little house this is! he called out cheerily. So compact! So well planned! Everything here and everything in its place! Well make a jolly night of it. The first thing we want is a good fire; Ill see to that- I always know where to find things. So this is the parlour? Splendid! Your own idea, those little sleeping-bunks in the wall? Capital! Now, Ill fetch the wood and the coals, and you get a duster, Mole- youll find one in the drawer of the kitchen table- and try and smarten things up a bit. Bustle about, old chap! Encouraged by his inspiriting companion, the Mole roused himself and dusted and polished with energy and heartiness, while the Rat, running to and fro with armfuls of fuel, soon had a cheerful blaze roaring up the chimney. He

hailed the Mole to come and warm himself; but Mole promptly had another fit of the blues, dropping down on a couch in dark despair and burying his face in his duster. Rat, he moaned, how about your supper, you poor, cold, hungry, weary animal? Ive nothing to give you- nothing- not a crumb! What a fellow you are for giving in! said the Rat reproachfully. Why, only just now I saw a sardine-opener on the kitchen dresser, quite distinctly; and everybody knows that means there are sardines about somewhere in the neighbourhood. Rouse yourself! pull yourself together, and come with me and forage. They went and foraged accordingly, hunting through every cupboard and turning out every drawer. The result was not so very depressing after all, though of course it might have been better; a tin of sardines- a box of captains biscuits, nearly full- and a German sausage encased in silver paper.

Theres a banquet for you! observed the Rat, as he arranged the table. I know some animals who would give their ears to be sitting down to supper with us to-night! No bread! groaned the Mole dolorously; no butter, no- No pate de foie gras, no champagne! continued the Rat, grinning. And that reminds me- whats that little door at the end of the passage? Your cellar, of course! Every luxury in this house! Just you wait a minute. He made for the cellar-door, and presently reappeared, somewhat dusty, with a bottle of beer in each paw and another under each arm, Self-indulgent beggar you seem to be, Mole, he observed. Deny yourself nothing. This is really the jolliest little place I ever was in. Now, wherever did you pick up those prints? Make the place look so home-like, they do. No wonder youre so fond of it, Mole. Tell us all about it, and how you came to make it what it is.

Then, while the Rat busied himself fetching plates, and knives and forks, and mustard which he mixed in an egg-cup, the Mole, his bosom still heaving with the stress of his recent emotion, related- somewhat shyly at first, but with more freedom as he warmed to his subject- how this was planned, and how that was thought out, and how this was got through a windfall from an aunt, and that was a wonderful find and a bargain, and this other thing was bought out of laborious savings and a certain amount of going without. His spirits finally quite restored, he must needs go and caress his possessions, and take a lamp and show off their points to his visitor and expatiate on them, quite forgetful of the supper they both so much needed; Rat, who was desperately hungry but strove to conceal it, nodding seriously, examining with a puckered brow, and saying, wonderful, and most remarkable, at intervals, when the chance for an observation was given him.

At last the Rat succeeded in decoying him to the table, and had just got seriously to work with the sardine-opener when sounds were heard from the forecourt without- sounds like the scuffling of small feet in the gravel and a confused murmur of tiny voices, while broken sentences reached them- Now, all in a line hold the lantern up a bit, Tommy- clear your throats first- no coughing after I say one, two, three.- Wheres young Bill?- Here, come on, do, were all a-waiting- Whats up? inquired the Rat, pausing in his labours.

I think it must be the field-mice, replied the Mole, with a touch of pride in his manner. They go round carol-singing regularly at this time of the year.

Theyre quite an institution in these parts. And they never pass me over- they come to Mole End last of all; and I used to give them hot drinks, and supper too sometimes, when I could afford it. It will be like old times to hear them again. Lets have a look at them! cried the Rat, jumping up and running to the door.

It was a pretty sight, and a seasonable one, that met their eyes when they flung the door open. In the fore-court, lit by the dim rays of a horn lantern, some eight or ten little field-mice stood in a semicircle, red worsted comforters round their throats, their fore- paws thrust deep into their pockets, their feet jigging for warmth. With bright beady eyes they glanced shyly at each other, sniggering a little, sniffing and applying coat- sleeves a good deal. As the door opened, one of the elder ones that carried the lantern was just saying, Now then, one, two, three! and forthwith their shrill little voices uprose on the air, singing one of the oldtime carols that their forefathers composed in fields that were fallow and held by frost, or when snow-bound in chimney corners, and handed down to be sung in the miry street to lamp-lit windows at Yule-time. 

CAROL Villagers all, this frosty tide, Let your doors swing open wide, Though wind my follow, and snow beside, Yet draw us in by your fire to bide; Joy shall be yours in the morning! Here we stand in the cold and the sleet, Blowing fingers and stamping feet, Come from far away you to greet You by the fire and we in the streetBidding you joy in the morning! For ere one half of the night was gone, Sudden a star has led us on, Raining bliss and benison Bliss to-morrow and more anon, Joy for every morning! Goodman Joseph toiled through the snow Saw the star oer a stable low; Mary she might not further go Welcome thatch, and litter below! Joy was hers in the morning! And then they heard the angels tell Who were the first to cry Nowell? Animals all, as it befell, In the stable were they did dwell! Joy shall be theirs in the morning! The voices ceased, the singers, bashful but smiling, exchanged sidelong glances, and silence succeeded- but for a moment only. Then, from up above and far away, down the tunnel they had so lately travelled was borne to their ears in a faint musical hum the sound of distant bells ringing a joyful and clangorous peal. Very well sung, boys! cried the Rat heartily. And now come along in, all of you, and warm yourselves by the fire, and have something hot! Yes, come along, field-mice, cried the Mole eagerly. This is quite like old times! Shut the door after you. Pull up that settle to the fire. Now, you just wait a minute, while we- O, Ratty! he cried in despair, plumping down on a seat, with tears impending. Whatever are we doing? Weve nothing to give them! You leave all that to me, said the masterful Rat. Here, you with the lantern! Come over this way. I want to talk to you. Now, tell me, are there any shops open at this hour of the night? Why, certainly, sir, replied the field-mouse respectfully. At this time of the year our shops keep open to all sorts of hours. Then look here! said the Rat. You go off at once, you and your lantern, and you get me- Here much muttered conversation ensued, and the Mole only heard bits of it, such as- Fresh, mind!- no, a

pound of that will do- see you get Bugginss, for I wont have any other- no, only the best- if you cant get it there, try somewhere else- yes, of course, home-made, no tinned stuff- well then, do the best you can! Finally, there was a chink of coin passing from paw to paw, the field-mouse was provided with an ample basket for his purchases, and off he hurried, he and his lantern.

The rest of the field-mice, perched in a row on the settle, their small legs swinging, gave themselves up to enjoyment of the fire, and toasted their chilblains till they tingled; while the Mole, failing to draw them into easy conversation, plunged into family history and made each of them recite the names of his numerous brothers, who were too young, it appeared, to be allowed to go out acarolling this year, but looked forward very shortly to winning the parental consent.

The Rat, meanwhile, was busy examining the label on one of the beer-bottles. I perceive this to be Old Burton, he remarked approvingly. Sensible Mole! The very thing! Now we shall be able to mull some ale! Get the things ready, Mole, while I draw the corks. It did not take long to prepare the brew and thrust the tin heater well into the red heart of the fire; and soon every field-mouse was sipping and coughing and choking (for a little mulled ale goes a long way) and wiping his eyes and laughing and forgetting he had ever been cold in all his life. They act plays too, these fellows, the Mole explained to the Rat. Make them up all by themselves, and act them afterwards. And very well they do it, too! They gave us a capital one last year, about a field-mouse who was captured at sea by a Barbary corsair, and made to row in a galley; and when he escaped and got home again, his lady-love had gone into a convent. Here, you! You were in it, I remember. Get up and recite a bit. The field-mouse addressed got up on his legs, giggled shyly, looked round the room, and remained absolutely tongue-tied. His comrades cheered him on, Mole coaxed and encouraged him, and the Rat went so far as to take him by the shoulders and shake him; but nothing could overcome his stage-fright. They were all busily engaged on him like watermen applying the Royal Humane Societys regulations to a case of long submersion, when the latch clicked, the door opened, and the field-mouse with the lantern reappeared, staggering under the weight of his basket. There was no more talk of play-acting once the very real and solid contents of the basket had been tumbled out on the table. Under the generalship of Rat, everybody was set to do something or to fetch something. In a very few minutes supper was ready, and Mole, as he took the head of the table in a sort of a dream, saw a lately barren board set thick with savoury comforts; saw his little friends faces brighten and beam as they fell to without delay; and then let himself loose- for he was famished indeed- on the provender so magically provided, thinking what a happy home- coming this had turned out, after all. As they ate, they talked of old times, and the field-mice gave him the local gossip up to date, and answered as well as they could the hundred questions he had to ask them. The Rat said little or nothing, only taking care that each guest had what he wanted, and plenty of it, and that Mole had no trouble or anxiety about anything. They clattered off at last, very grateful and showering wishes of the season, with their jacket pockets stuffed with remembrances for the small brothers and sisters at home.

When the door had closed on the last of them and the chink of the lanterns had died away, Mole and Rat kicked the fire up, drew their chairs in, brewed themselves a last nightcap of mulled ale, and discussed the events of the long day. At last the Rat, with a tremendous yawn, said, Mole, old chap, Im ready to drop. Sleepy is simply not the word. That your own bunk over on that side? Very well, then, Ill take this. What a ripping little house this is! Everything so handy!

He clambered into his bunk and rolled himself well up in the blankets, and slumber gathered him forthwith, as a swathe of barley is folded into the arms of the reaping machine. The weary Mole also was glad to turn in without delay, and soon had his head on his pillow, in great joy and contentment. But ere he closed his eyes he let them wander round his old room, mellow in the glow of the firelight that played or rested on familiar and friendly things which had long been unconsciously a part of him, and now smilingly received him back, without rancour. He was now in just the frame of mind that the tactful Rat had quietly worked to bring about in him. He saw clearly how plain and simple- how narrow, even- it all was; but clearly, too, how much it all meant to him, and the special value of some such anchorage in ones existence. He did not at all want to abandon the new life and its splendid spaces, to turn his back on sun and air and all they offered him and creep home and stay there; the upper world was all too strong, it called to him still, even down there, and he knew he must return to the larger stage. But it was good to think he had this to come back to, this place which was all his own, these things which were so glad to see him again and could always be counted upon for the same simple welcome.
IT was a bright morning in the early part of summer; the river had resumed its wonted banks and its accustomed pace, and a hot sun seemed to be pulling everything green and bushy and spiky up out of the earth towards him, as if by strings. The Mole and the Water Rat had been up since dawn, very busy on matters connected with boats and the opening of the boating season; painting and varnishing, mending paddles, repairing cushions, hunting for missing boat-hooks, and so on; and were finishing breakfast in their little parlour and eagerly discussing their plans for the day, when a heavy knock sounded at the door.

Bother! said the Rat, all over egg. See who it is, Mole, like a good chap, since youve finished. The Mole went to attend the summons, and the Rat heard him utter a cry of surprise. Then he flung the parlour door open, and announced with much importance, Mr. Badger! This was a wonderful thing, indeed, that the Badger should pay a formal call on them, or indeed on anybody. He generally had to be caught, if you wanted him badly, as he slipped quietly along a hedgerow of an early morning or a late evening, or else hunted up in his own house in the middle of the Wood, which was a serious undertaking.

The Badger strode heavily into the room, and stood looking at the two animals with an expression full of seriousness. The Rat let his egg-spoon fall on the table-cloth, and sat open-mouthed. The hour has come! said the Badger at last with great solemnity.

What hour? asked the Rat uneasily, glancing at the clock on the mantelpiece. Whose hour, you should rather say, replied the Badger. Why, Toads hour! The hour of Toad! I said I would take him in hand as soon as the winter was well over, and Im going to take him in hand to-day! Toads hour, of course! cried the Mole delightedly. Hooray! I remember now! Well teach him to be a sensible Toad! This very morning, continued the Badger, taking an arm-chair, as I learnt last night from a trustworthy source, another new and exceptionally powerful motor-car will arrive at Toad Hall on approval or return. At this very moment, perhaps, Toad is busy arraying himself in those singularly hideous habiliments so dear to him, which transform him from a (comparatively) good-looking Toad into an Object which throws any decent-minded animal that comes across it into a violent fit. We must be up and doing, ere it is too late. You two animals will accompany me instantly to Toad Hall, and the work of rescue shall be accomplished. Right you are! cried the Rat, starting up. Well rescue the poor unhappy animal! Well convert him! Hell be the most converted Toad that ever was before weve done with him! They set off up the road on their mission of mercy, Badger leading the way. Animals when in company walk in a proper and sensible manner, in single file, instead of sprawling all across the road and being of no use or support to each other in case of sudden trouble or danger.

They reached the carriage-drive of Toad Hall to find, as the Badger had anticipated, a shiny new motor-car, of great size, painted a bright red (Toads favourite colour), standing in front of the house. As they neared the door it was flung open, and Mr. Toad, arrayed in goggles, cap, gaiters, and enormous overcoat, came swaggering down the steps, drawing on his gauntleted gloves.

Hullo! come on, you fellows! he cried cheerfully on catching sight of them. Youre just in time to come with me for a jolly- to come for a jolly- for a- erjolly- His hearty accents faltered and fell away as he noticed the stern unbending look on the countenances of his silent friends, and his invitation remained unfinished. The Badger strode up the steps. Take him inside, he said sternly to his companions. Then, as Toad was hustled through the door, struggling and protesting, he turned to the chauffeur in charge of the new motor-car. Im afraid you wont be wanted to-day, he said. Mr. Toad has changed his mind. He will not require the car. Please understand that this is final. You neednt wait. Then he followed the others inside and shut the door. Now then! he said to the Toad, when the four of them stood together in the Hall, first of all, take those ridiculous things off! Shant! replied Toad, with great spirit. What is the meaning of this gross outrage? I demand an instant explanation. Take them off him, then, you two, ordered the Badger briefly. They had to lay Toad out on the floor, kicking and calling all sorts of names, before they could get to work properly. Then the Rat sat on him, and the Mole got his motor- clothes off him bit by bit, and they stood him up on his legs again. A good deal of his blustering spirit seemed to have evaporated with the removal of his fine panoply. Now that he was merely Toad, and no longer the Terror of the Highway, he giggled feebly and looked from one to the other appealingly, seeming quite to understand the situation. You knew it must come to this, sooner or later, Toad, the Badger explained severely. Youve disregarded all the warnings weve given you, youve gone on squandering the money your father left you, and youre getting us animals a bad name in the district by your furious driving and your smashes and your rows with the police. Independence is all very well, but we animals never allow our friends to make fools of themselves beyond a certain limit; and that limit youve reached. Now, youre a good fellow in many respects, and I dont want to be too hard on you. Ill make one more effort to bring you to reason. You will come with me into the smoking-room, and there you will hear some facts about yourself; and well see whether you come out of that room the same Toad that you went in. He took Toad firmly by the arm, led him into the smoking-room, and closed the door behind them. Thats no good! said the Rat contemptuously. Talking to Toadll never cure him. Hell say anything. They made themselves comfortable in armchairs and waited patiently. Through the closed door they could just hear the long continuous drone of the Badgers voice, rising and falling in waves of oratory; and presently they noticed that the sermon began to be punctuated at intervals by long-drawn sobs, evidently proceeding from the bosom of Toad, who was a soft-hearted and affectionate fellow, very easily converted- for the time being- to any point of view.

After some three-quarters of an hour the door opened, and the Badger reappeared, solemnly leading by the paw a very limp and dejected Toad. His skin hung baggily about him, his legs wobbled, and his cheeks were furrowed by the tears so plentifully called forth by the Badgers moving discourse.

Sit down there, Toad, said the Badger kindly, pointing to a chair. My friends, he went on, I am pleased to inform you that Toad has at last seen the error of his ways. He is truly sorry for his misguided conduct in the past, and he has undertaken to give up motor-cars entirely and for ever. I have his solemn promise to that effect. That is very good news, said the Mole gravely.

Very good news indeed, observed the Rat dubiously, if only- if only- He was looking very hard at Toad as he said this, and could not help thinking he perceived something vaguely resembling a twinkle in that animals still sorrowful eye. Theres only one thing more to be done, continued the gratified Badger.

Toad, I want you solemnly to repeat, before your friends here, what you fully admitted to me in the smoking-room just now. First, you are sorry for what youve done, and you see the folly of it all? There was a long, long pause. Toad looked desperately this way and that, while the other animals waited in grave silence. At last he spoke.

No! he said, a little sullenly, but stoutly; Im not sorry. And it wasnt folly at all! It was simply glorious! What? cried the Badger, greatly scandalised. You backsliding animal, didnt you tell me just now, in there- Oh, yes, yes, in there, said Toad impatiently. Id have said anything in there. Youre so eloquent, dear Badger, and so moving, and so convincing, and put all your points so frightfully well- you can do what you like with me in there, and you know it. But Ive been searching my mind since, and going over things in it, and I find that Im not a bit sorry or repentant really, so its no earthly good saying I am; now, is it? Then you dont promise, said the Badger, never to touch a motor-car again? Certainly not! replied Toad emphatically. On the contrary, I faithfully promise that the very first motor-car I see, poop-poop! off I go in it! Told you so, didnt I? observed the Rat to the Mole.

Very well, then, said the Badger firmly, rising to his feet. Since you wont yield to persuasion, well try what force can do. I feared it would come to this all along. Youve often asked us three to come and stay with you, Toad, in this handsome house of yours; well, now were going to. When weve converted you to a proper point of view we may quit, but not before. Take him upstairs, you two, and lock him up in his bedroom, while we arrange matters between ourselves. Its for your own good, Toady, you know, said the Rat kindly, as Toad, kicking and struggling, was hauled up the stairs by his two faithful friends. Think what fun we shall all have together, just as we used to, when youve quite got over this- this painful attack of yours! Well take great care of everything for you till youre well, Toad, said the Mole; and well see your money isnt wasted, as it has been. No more of those regrettable incidents with the police, Toad, said the Rat, as they thrust him into his bedroom.

And no more weeks in hospital, being ordered about by female nurses, Toad, added the Mole, turning the key on him.

They descended the stair, Toad shouting abuse at them through the keyhole; and the three friends then met in conference on the situation. Its going to be a tedious business, said the Badger, sighing. Ive never seen Toad so determined. However, we will see it out. He must never be left an instant unguarded. We shall have to take it in turns to be with him, till the poison has worked itself out of his system. They arranged watches accordingly. Each animal took it in turns to sleep in Toads room at night, and they divided the day up between them. At first Toad was undoubtedly very trying to his careful guardians. When his violent paroxysms possessed him he would arrange bedroom chairs in rude resemblance of a motor-car and would crouch on the foremost of them, bent forward and staring fixedly ahead, making uncouth and ghastly noises, till the climax was reached, when, turning a complete somersault, he would lie prostrate amidst the ruins of the chairs, apparently completely satisfied for the moment. As time passed, however, these painful seizures grew gradually less frequent, and his friends strove to divert his mind into fresh channels. But his interest in other matters did not seem to revive, and he grew apparently languid and depressed.

One fine morning the Rat, whose turn it was to go on duty, went upstairs to relieve Badger, whom he found fidgeting to be off and stretch his legs in a long ramble round his wood and down his earths and burrows. Toads still in bed, he told the Rat, outside the door. Cant get much out of him, except, O leave him alone, he wants nothing, perhaps hell be better presently, it may pass off in time, dont be unduly anxious, and so on. Now, you look out, Rat! When Toads quiet and submissive, and playing at being the hero of a Sunday-school prize, then hes at his artfullest. Theres sure to be something up. I know him. Well, now, I must be off. How are you to-day, old chap? inquired the Rat cheerfully, as he approached Toads bedside.

He had to wait some minutes for an answer. At last a feeble voice replied, Thank you so much, dear Ratty! So good of you to inquire! But first tell me how you are yourself, and the excellent Mole? O, were all right, replied the Rat. Mole, he added incautiously, is going out for a run round with Badger. Theyll be out till luncheon time, so you and I will spend a pleasant morning together, and Ill do my best to amuse you. Now jump up, theres a good fellow, and dont lie moping there on a fine morning like this! Dear, kind Rat, murmured Toad, how little you realise my condition, and how very far I am from jumping up now- if ever! But do not trouble about me.

I hate being a burden to my friends, and I do not expect to be one much longer. Indeed, I almost hope not. Well, I hope not, too, said the Rat heartily. Youve been a fine bother to us all this time, and Im glad to hear its going to stop. And in weather like this, and the boating season just beginning! Its too bad of you, Toad! It isnt the trouble we mind, but youre making us miss such an awful lot. Im afraid it is the trouble you mind, though, replied the Toad languidly. I can quite understand it. Its natural enough. Youre tired of bothering about me. I mustnt ask you to do anything further. Im a nuisance, I know. You are, indeed, said the Rat. But I tell you, Id take any trouble on earth for you, if only youd be a sensible animal. If I thought that, Ratty, murmured Toad, more feebly than ever, then I would beg you- for the last time, probably- to step round to the village as quickly as possible- even now it may be too

late- and fetch the doctor. But dont you bother. Its only a trouble, and perhaps we may as well let things take their course. Why, what do you want a doctor for? inquired the Rat, coming closer and examining him. He certainly lay very still and flat, and his voice was weaker and his manner much changed.

Surely you have noticed of late- murmured Toad. But, no- why should you? Noticing things is only a trouble. To-morrow, indeed, you may be saying to yourself, O, if only I had noticed sooner! If only I had done something! But no; its a trouble. Never mind- forget that I asked.

Look here, old man, said the Rat, beginning to get rather alarmed, of course Ill fetch a doctor to you, if you really think you want him. But you can hardly be bad enough for that yet. Lets talk about something else. I fear, dear friend, said Toad, with a sad smile, that talk can do little in a case like this- or doctors either, for that matter; still, one must grasp at the slightest straw. And, by the way- while you are about it- I hate to give you additional trouble, but I happen to remember that you will pass the door- would you mind at the same time asking the lawyer to step up? It would be a convenience to me, and there are moments- perhaps I should say there is a moment- when one must face disagreeable tasks, at whatever cost to exhausted nature A lawyer! O, he must be really bad! the affrighted Rat said to himself, as he hurried from the room, not forgetting, however, to lock the door carefully behind him.

Outside, he stopped to consider. The other two were far away, and he had no one to consult. Its best to be on the safe side, he said, on reflection. Ive known Toad fancy himself frightfully bad before, without the slightest reason; but Ive never heard him ask for a lawyer! If theres nothing really the matter, the doctor will tell him hes an old ass, and cheer him up; and that will be something gained. Id better humour him and go; it wont take very long. So he ran off to the village on his errand of mercy.

The Toad, who had hopped lightly out of bed as soon as he heard the key turned in the lock, watched him eagerly from the window till he disappeared down the carriage- drive. Then, laughing heartily, he dressed as quickly as possible in the smartest suit he could lay hands on at the moment, filled his pockets with cash which he took from a small drawer in the dressing-table, and next, knotting the sheets from his bed together and tying one end of the improvised rope round the central mullion of the handsome Tudor window which formed such a feature of his bedroom, he scrambled out, slid lightly to the ground, and, taking the opposite direction to the Rat, marched off lightheartedly, whistling a merry tune.

It was a gloomy luncheon for Rat when the Badger and the Mole at length returned, and he had to face them at table with his pitiful and unconvincing story. The Badgers caustic, not to say brutal, remarks may be imagined, and therefore passed over; but it was painful to the Rat that even the Mole, though he took his friends side as far as possible, could not help saying, Youve been a bit of a duffer this time, Ratty! Toad, too, of all animals! He did it awfully well, said the crestfallen Rat.

He did you awfully well! rejoined the Badger hotly. However, talking wont mend matters. Hes got clear away for the time, thats certain; and the worst of it is, hell be so conceited with what hell think is his cleverness that he may commit any folly. One

comfort is, were free now, and neednt waste any more of our precious time doing sentry-go. But wed better continue to sleep at Toad Hall for a while longer. Toad may be brought back at any moment- on a stretcher, or between two policemen. So spoke the Badger, not knowing what the future held in store, or how much water, and of how turbid a character, was to run under bridges before Toad should sit at ease again in his ancestral Hall. Meanwhile, Toad, gay and irresponsible, was walking briskly along the high road, some miles from home. At first he had taken by-paths, and crossed many fields, and changed his course several times, in case of pursuit; but now, feeling by this time safe from recapture, and the sun smiling brightly on him, and all Nature joining in a chorus of approval to the song of self-praise that his own heart was singing to him, he almost danced along the road in his satisfaction and conceit.

Smart piece of work that! he remarked to himself chuckling. Brain against brute force- and brain came out on the top- as its bound to do. Poor old Ratty! My! wont he catch it when the Badger gets back! A worthy fellow, Ratty, with many good qualities, but very little intelligence and absolutely no education. I must take him in hand some day, and see if I can make something of him. Filled full of conceited thoughts such as these he strode along, his head in the air, till he reached a little town, where the sign of The Red Lion, swinging across the road halfway down the main street, reminded him that he had not breakfasted that day, and that he was exceedingly hungry after his long walk. He marched into the Inn, ordered the best luncheon that could be provided at so short a notice, and sat down to eat it in the coffee-room.

He was about half-way through his meal when an only too familiar sound, approaching down the street, made him start and fall a-trembling all over. The pooppoop! drew nearer and nearer, the car could be heard to turn into the inn-yard and come to a stop, and Toad had to hold on to the leg of the table to conceal his overmastering emotion. Presently the party entered the coffee-room, hungry, talkative, and gay, voluble on their experiences of the morning and the merits of the chariot that had brought them along so well. Toad listened eagerly, all ears, for a time; at last he could stand it no longer. He slipped out of the room quietly, paid his bill at the bar, and as soon as he got outside sauntered round quietly to the inn-yard.

There cannot be any harm, he said to himself, in my only just looking at it! The car stood in the middle of the yard, quite unattended, the stable-helps and other hangers- on being all at their dinner. Toad walked slowly round it, inspecting, criticising, musing deeply.

I wonder, he said to himself presently, I wonder if this sort of car starts easily? Next moment, hardly knowing how it came about, he found he had hold of the handle and was turning it. As the familiar sound broke forth, the old passion seized on Toad and completely mastered him, body and soul. As if in a dream he found himself, somehow, seated in the drivers seat; as if in a dream, he pulled the lever and swung the car round the yard and out through the archway; and, as if in a dream, all sense of right and wrong, all fear of obvious consequences, seemed temporarily suspended. He increased his pace, and as the car devoured the street and leapt forth on the high road through the open country, he was only conscious that he was Toad once more, Toad at his best and highest, Toad the terror, the traffic-queller, the Lord of the lone trail, before whom

all must give way or be smitten into nothingness and everlasting night. He chanted as he flew, and the car responded with sonorous drone; the miles were eaten up under him as he sped he knew not whither, fulfilling his instincts, living his hour, reckless of what might come to him. To my mind, observed the Chairman of the Bench of Magistrates cheerfully, the only difficulty that presents itself in this otherwise very clear case is, how we can possibly make it sufficiently hot for the incorrigible rogue and hardened ruffian whom we see cowering in the dock before us. Let me see: he has been found guilty, on the clearest evidence, first, of stealing a valuable motor-car; secondly, of driving to the public danger; and, thirdly, of gross impertinence to the rural police. Mr. Clerk, will you tell us, please, what is the very stiffest penalty we can impose for each of these offences? Without, of course, giving the prisoner the benefit of any doubt, because there isnt any. The Clerk scratched his nose with his pen. Some people would consider, he observed, that stealing the motor-car was the worst offence; and so it is. But cheeking the police undoubtedly carries the severest penalty; and so it ought. Supposing you were to say twelve months for the theft, which is mild; and three years for the furious driving, which is lenient; and fifteen years for the cheek, which was pretty bad sort of cheek, judging by what weve heard from the witness-box, even if you only believe one-tenth part of what you heard, and I never believe more myself- those figures, if added together correctly, tot up to nineteen years- First-rate! said the Chairman.

-So you had better make it a round twenty years and be on the safe side, concluded the Clerk. An excellent suggestion! said the Chairman approvingly. Prisoner! Pull yourself together and try and stand up straight. Its going to be twenty years for you this time. And mind, if you appear before us again, upon any charge whatever, we shall have to deal with you very seriously! Then the brutal minions of the law fell upon the hapless Toad; loaded him with chains, and dragged him from the Court House, shrieking, praying, protesting; across the market-place, where the playful populace, always as severe upon detected crime as they are sympathetic and helpful when one is merely wanted, assailed him with jeers, carrots, and popular catch-words; past hooting school children, their innocent faces lit up with the pleasure they ever derive from the sight of a gentleman in difficulties; across the hollow-sounding drawbridge, below the spiky portcullis, under the frowning archway of the grim old castle, whose ancient towers soared high overhead; past guardrooms full of grinning soldiery off duty, past sentries who coughed in a horrid, sarcastic way, because that is as much as a sentry on his post dare do to show his contempt and abhorrence of crime; up time-worn winding stairs, past men-at-arms in casquet and corselet of steel, darting threatening looks through their vizards; across courtyards, where mastiffs strained at their leash and pawed the air to get at him; past ancient warders, their halberds leant against the wall, dozing over a pasty and a flagon of brown ale; on and on, past the rack-chamber and the thumbscrew-room, past the turning that led to the private scaffold, till they reached the door of the grimmest dungeon that lay in the heart of the innermost keep. There at last they paused, where an ancient gaoler sat fingering a bunch of mighty keys.

Oddsbodikins! said the sergeant of police, taking off his helmet and wiping his forehead. Rouse thee, old loon, and take over from us this vile Toad, a criminal of deepest guilt and matchless artfulness and resource. Watch and ward him with all thy skill; and mark thee well, greybeard, should aught untoward befall, thy old head shall answer for his- and a murrain on both of them! The gaoler nodded grimly, laying his withered hand on the shoulder of the miserable Toad. The rusty key creaked in the lock, the great door clanged behind them; and Toad was a helpless prisoner in the remotest dungeon of the bestguarded keep of the stoutest castle in all the length and breadth of Merry England.
THE Willow-Wren was twittering his thin little song, hidden himself in the dark selvedge of the river bank. Though it was past ten oclock at night, the sky still clung to and retained some lingering skirts of light from the departed day; and the sullen heats of the torrid afternoon broke up and rolled away at the dispersing touch of the cool fingers of the short midsummer night. Mole lay stretched on the bank, still panting from the stress of the fierce day that had been cloudless from dawn to late sunset, and waited for his friend to return. He had been on the river with some companions, leaving the Water Rat free to keep an engagement of long standing with Otter; and he had come back to find the house dark and deserted, and no sign of Rat, who was doubtless keeping it up late with his old comrade. It was still too hot to think of staying indoors, so he lay on some cool dock-leaves, and thought over the past day and its doings, and how very good they all had been.

The Rats light footfall was presently heard approaching over the parched grass. O, the blessed coolness! he said, and sat down, gazing thoughtfully into the river, silent and pre-occupied. You stayed to supper, of course? said the Mole presently.

Simply had to, said the Rat. They wouldnt hear of my going before. You know how kind they always are. And they made things as jolly for me as ever they could, right up to the moment I left. But I felt a brute all the time, as it was clear to me they were very unhappy, though they tried to hide it. Mole, Im afraid theyre in trouble. Little Portly is missing again; and you know what a lot his father thinks of him, though he never says much about it. What, that child? said the Mole lightly. Well, suppose he is; why worry about it? Hes always straying off and getting lost, and turning up again; hes so adventurous. But no harm ever happens to him. Everybody here-abouts knows him and likes him, just as they do old Otter, and you may be sure some animal or other will come across him and bring him back again all right. Why, weve found him ourselves, miles from home, and quite self-possessed and cheerful! Yes; but this time its more serious, said the Rat gravely. Hes been missing for some days now, and the Otters have hunted everywhere, high and low, without finding the slightest trace. And theyve asked every animal, too, for miles around, and no one knows anything about

him. Otters evidently more anxious than hell admit. I got out of him that young Portly hasnt learnt to swim very well yet, and I can see hes thinking of the weir. Theres a lot of water coming down still, considering the time of the year, and the place always had a fascination for the child. And then there are- well, traps and things- you know. Otters not the fellow to be nervous about any son of his before its time. And now he is nervous. When I left, he came out with me- said he wanted some air, and talked about stretching his legs. But I could see it wasnt that, so I drew him out and pumped him, and got it all from him at last. He was going to spend the night watching by the ford. You know the place where the old ford used to be, in bygone days before they built the bridge? I know it well, said the Mole. But why should Otter choose to watch there? Well, it seems that it was there he gave Portly his first swimming-lesson, continued the Rat. From that shallow, gravelly spit near the bank. And it was there he used to teach him fishing, and there young Portly caught his first fish, of which he was so very proud. The child loved the spot, and Otter thinks that if he came wandering back from wherever he is- if he is anywhere by this time, poor little chap- he might make for the ford he was so fond of; or if he came across it hed remember it well, and stop there and play, perhaps. So Otter goes there every night and watches- on the chance, you know, just on the chance! They were silent for a time, both thinking of the same thing- the lonely, heartsore animal, crouched by the ford, watching and waiting, the long night throughon the chance.

Well, well, said the Rat presently, I suppose we ought to be thinking about turning in. But he never offered to move. Rat, said the Mole, I simply cant go and turn in, and go to sleep, and do nothing, even though there doesnt seem to be anything to be done. Well get the boat out, and paddle up stream. The moon will be up in an hour or so, and then we will search as well as we can- anyhow, it will be better than going to bed and doing nothing. Just what I was thinking myself, said the Rat. Its not the sort of night for bed anyhow; and daybreak is not so very far off, and then we may pick up some news of him from early risers as we go along. They got the boat out, and the Rat took the sculls, paddling with caution. Out in midstream, there was a clear, narrow track that faintly reflected the sky; but wherever shadows fell on the water from bank, bush, or tree, they were as solid to all appearance as the banks themselves, and the Mole had to steer with judgment accordingly. Dark and deserted as it was, the night was full of small noises, song and chatter and rustling, telling of the busy little population who were up and about, plying their trades and vocations through the night till sunshine should fall on them at last and send them off to their well-earned repose. The waters own noises, too, were more apparent than by day, its gurglings and cloops more unexpected and near at hand; and constantly they started at what seemed a sudden clear call from an actual articulate voice.

The line of the horizon was clear and hard against the sky, and in one particular quarter it showed black against a silvery climbing phosphorescence that grew and grew. At last, over the rim of the waiting earth the moon lifted with slow majesty till it swung clear of the horizon and rode off, free of moorings; and once more they began to see surfaces- meadows wide-spread, and quiet gardens, and the river itself from bank

to bank, all softly disclosed, all washed clean of mystery and terror, all radiant again as by day, but with a difference that was tremendous. Their old haunts greeted them again in other raiment, as if they had slipped away and put on this pure new apparel and come quietly back, smiling as they shyly waited to see if they would be recognised again under it.

Fastening their boat to a willow, the friends landed in this silent, silver kingdom, and patiently explored the hedges, the hollow trees, the runnels and their little culverts, the ditches and dry water-ways. Embarking again and crossing over, they worked their way up the stream in this manner, while the moon, serene and detached in a cloudless sky, did what she could, though so far off, to help them in their quest; till her hour came and she sank earthwards reluctantly, and left them, and mystery once more held field and river.

Then a change began slowly to declare itself. The horizon became clearer, field and tree came more into sight, and somehow with a different look; the mystery began to drop away from them. A bird piped suddenly, and was still; and a light breeze sprang up and set the reeds and bulrushes rustling. Rat, who was in the stern of the boat, while Mole sculled, sat up suddenly and listened with a passionate intentness. Mole, who with gentle strokes was just keeping the boat moving while he scanned the banks with care, looked at him with curiosity.

Its gone! sighed the Rat, sinking back in his seat again. So beautiful and strange and new! Since it was to end so soon, I almost wish I had never heard it. For it has roused a longing in me that is pain, and nothing seems worth while but just to hear that sound once more and go on listening to it for ever. No! There it is again! he cried, alert once more. Entranced, he was silent for a long space, spellbound.

Now it passes on and I begin to lose it, he said presently. O Mole! the beauty of it! The merry bubble and joy, the thin, clear, happy call of the distant piping! Such music I never dreamed of, and the call in it is stronger even than the music is sweet! Row on, Mole, row! For the music and the call must be for us. The Mole, greatly wondering, obeyed. I hear nothing myself, he said, but the wind playing in the reeds and rushes and osiers. The Rat never answered, if indeed he heard. Rapt, transported, trembling, he was possessed in all his senses by this new divine thing that caught up his helpless soul and swung and dandled it, a powerless but happy infant in a strong sustaining grasp.

In silence Mole rowed steadily, and soon they came to a point where the river divided, a long backwater branching off to one side. With a slight movement of his head Rat, who had long dropped the rudder-lines, directed the rower to take the backwater. The creeping tide of light gained and gained, and now they could see the colour of the flowers that gemmed the waters edge.

Clearer and nearer still, cried the Rat joyously. Now you must surely hear it! Ah- at last- I see you do! Breathless and transfixed the Mole stopped rowing as the liquid run of that glad piping broke on him like a wave, caught him up, and possessed him utterly .

He saw the tears on his comrades cheeks, and bowed his head and understood.

For a space they hung there, brushed by the purple loose-strife that fringed the bank; then the clear imperious summons that marched hand-in-hand with the intoxicating melody imposed its will on Mole, and mechanically he bent to his oars again. And the light grew steadily stronger, but no birds sang as they were wont to do at the approach of dawn; and but for the heavenly music all was marvellously still.

On either side of them, as they glided onwards, the rich meadow-grass seemed that morning of a freshness and a greenness unsurpassable. Never had they noticed the roses so vivid, the willow-herb so riotous, the meadow-sweet so odorous and pervading. Then the murmur of the approaching weir began to hold the air, and they felt a consciousness that they were nearing the end, whatever it might be, that surely awaited their expedition.

A wide half-circle of foam and glinting lights and shining shoulders of green water, the great weir closed the backwater from bank to bank, troubled all the quiet surface with twirling eddies and floating foam-streaks, and deadened all other sounds with its solemn and soothing rumble. In midmost of the stream, embraced in the weirs shimmering arm-spread, a small island lay anchored, fringed close with willow and silver birch and alder. Reserved, shy, but full of significance, it hid whatever it might hold behind a veil, keeping it till the hour should come, and, with the hour, those who were called and chosen.

Slowly, but with no doubt or hesitation whatever, and in something of a solemn expectancy, the two animals passed through the broken, tumultuous water and moored their boat at the flowery margin of the island. In silence they landed, and pushed through the blossom and scented herbage and undergrowth that led up to the level ground, till they stood on a little lawn of a marvellous green, set round with Natures own orchard-trees- crab-apple, wild cherry, and sloe.

This is the place of my song-dream, the place the music played to me, whispered the Rat, as if in a trance. Here, in this holy place, here if anywhere, surely we shall find Him! Then suddenly the Mole felt a great Awe fall upon him, an awe that turned his muscles to water, bowed his head, and rooted his feet to the ground. It was no panic terror- indeed he felt wonderfully at peace and happy- but it was an awe that smote and held him and, without seeing, he knew it could only mean that some august Presence was very, very near. With difficulty he turned to look for his friend, and saw him at his side cowed, stricken, and trembling violently. And still there was utter silence in the populous bird-haunted branches around them; and still the light grew and grew.

Perhaps he would never have dared to raise his eyes, but that, though the piping was now hushed, the call and the summons seemed still dominant and imperious. He might not refuse, were Death himself waiting to strike him instantly, once he had looked with mortal eye on things rightly kept hidden. Trembling he obeyed, and raised his humble head; and then, in that utter clearness of the imminent dawn, while Nature, flushed with fulness of incredible colour, seemed to hold her breath for the event, he looked in the very eyes of the Friend and Helper; saw the backward sweep of the curved horns, gleaming in the growing daylight; saw the stern, hooked nose between the kindly eyes that were looking down on them humourously, while the bearded mouth broke into a

half-smile at the corners; saw the rippling muscles on the arm that lay across the broad chest, the long supple hand still holding the pan-pipes only just fallen away from the parted lips; saw the splendid curves of the shaggy limbs disposed in majestic ease on the sward; saw, last of all, nestling between his very hooves, sleeping soundly in entire peace and contentment, the little, round, podgy, childish form of the baby otter. All this he saw, for one moment breathless and intense, vivid on the morning sky; and still, as he looked, he lived; and still, as he lived, he wondered.

Rat! he found breath to whisper, shaking. Are you afraid? Afraid? murmured the Rat, his eyes shining with unutterable love. Afraid! Of Him? O, never, never! And yet- and yet- O, Mole, I am afraid! Then the two animals, crouching to the earth, bowed their heads and did worship.

Sudden and magnificent, the suns broad golden disc showed itself over the horizon facing them; and the first rays, shooting across the level water-meadows, took the animals full in the eyes and dazzled them. When they were able to look once more, the Vision had vanished, and the air was full of the carol of birds that hailed the dawn.

As they stared blankly, in dumb misery deepening as they slowly realised all they had seen and all they had lost, a capricious little breeze, dancing up from the surface of the water, tossed the aspens, shook the dewy roses, and blew lightly and caressingly in their faces; and with its soft touch came instant oblivion. For this is the last best gift that the kindly demi-god is careful to bestow on those to whom he has revealed himself in their helping: the gift of forgetfulness. Lest the awful remembrance should remain and grow, and overshadow mirth and pleasure, and the great haunting memory should spoil all the after-lives of little animals helped out of difficulties, in order that they should be happy and light-hearted as before.

Mole rubbed his eyes and stared at Rat, who was looking about him in a puzzled sort of way. I beg your pardon; what did you say, Rat? he asked. I think I was only remarking, said Rat slowly, that this was the right sort of place, and that here, if anywhere, we should find him. And look! Why, there he is, the little fellow! And with a cry of delight he ran towards the slumbering Portly.

But Mole stood still a moment, held in thought. As one wakened suddenly from a beautiful dream, who struggles to recall it, and can re-capture nothing but a dim sense of the beauty of it, the beauty! Till that, too, fades away in its turn, and the dreamer bitterly accepts the hard, cold waking and all its penalties; so Mole, after struggling with his memory for a brief space, shook his head sadly and followed the Rat.

Portly woke up with a joyous squeak, and wriggled with pleasure at the sight of his fathers friends, who had played with him so often in past days. In a moment, however, his face grew blank, and he fell to hunting round in a circle with pleading whine. As a child that has fallen happily asleep in its nurses arms, and wakes to find itself alone and laid in a strange place, and searches corners and cupboards, and runs from room to room, despair growing silently in its heart, even so Portly searched the island and searched, dogged and unwearying, till at last the black moment came for giving it up, and sitting down and crying bitterly.

The Mole ran quickly to comfort the little animal; but Rat, lingering, looked long and doubtfully at certain hoof-marks deep in the sward.

Some- great- animal- has been here, he murmured slowly and thoughtfully; and stood musing, musing; his mind strangely stirred. Come along, Rat! called the Mole. Think of poor Otter, waiting up there by the ford! Portly had soon been comforted by the promise of a treat- a jaunt on the river in Mr. Rats real boat; and the two animals conducted him to the waters side, placed him securely between them in the bottom of the boat, and paddled off down the backwater. The sun was fully up by now, and hot on them, birds sang lustily and without restraint, and flowers smiled and nodded from either bank, but somehow- so thought the animals- with less of richness and blaze of colour than they seemed to remember seeing quite recently somewhere- they wondered where.

The main river reached again, they turned the boats head upstream, towards the point where they knew their friend was keeping his lonely vigil. As they drew near the familiar ford, the Mole took the boat in to the bank, and they lifted Portly out and set him on his legs on the tow-path, gave him his marching orders and a friendly farewell pat on the back, and shoved out into mid-stream. They watched the little animal as he waddled along the path contentedly and with importance; watched him till they saw his muzzle suddenly lift and his waddle break into a clumsy amble as he quickened his pace with shrill whines and wriggles of recognition. Looking up the river, they could see Otter start up, tense and rigid, from out of the shallows where he crouched in dumb patience, and could hear his amazed and joyous bark as he bounded up through the osiers on to the path. Then the Mole, with a strong pull on one oar, swung the boat round and let the full stream bear them down again whither it would, their quest now happily ended.

I feel strangely tired, Rat, said the Mole, leaning wearily over his oars as the boat drifted. Its being up all night, youll say, perhaps; but thats nothing. We do as much half the nights of the week, at this time of the year. No; I feel as if I had been through something very exciting and rather terrible, and it was just over; and yet nothing particular has happened. Or something very surprising and splendid and beautiful, murmured the Rat, leaning back and closing his eyes. I feel just as you do, Mole; simply dead tired, though not body-tired. Its lucky weve got the stream with us, to take us home.

Isnt it jolly to feel the sun again, soaking into ones bones! And hark to the wind playing in the reeds! Its like music- far away music, said the Mole nodding drowsily. So I was thinking, murmured the Rat, dreamful and languid. Dance-musicthe lilting sort that runs on without a stop- but with words in it, too- it passes into words and out of them again- I catch them at intervals- then it is dance-music once more, and then nothing but the reeds soft thin whispering. You hear better than I, said the Mole sadly. I cannot catch the words. Let me try and give you them, said the Rat softly, his eyes still closed. Now it is turning into words again- faint but clear- Lest the awe should dwell- And turn your frolic to fret- You shall look on my power at the helping hour- But then you shall forget! Now the reeds take it up- forget, forget, they sigh, and it dies away in a rustle and a whisper. Then the voice returnsLest limbs be reddened and rent- I spring the trap that is set- As I loose the snare you may glimpse me there-

For surely you shall forget! Row nearer, Mole, nearer to the reeds! It is hard to catch, and grows each minute fainter. Helper and healer, I cheer- Small waifs in the woodland wet- Strays I find in it, wounds I bind in it- Bidding them all forget! Nearer, Mole, nearer! No, it is no good; the song has died away into reed-talk. But what do the words mean? asked the wondering Mole.

That I do not know, said the Rat simply. I passed them on to you as they reached me. Ah! now they return again, and this time full and clear! This time, at last, it is the real, the unmistakable thing, simple- passionate- perfect- Well, lets have it, then, said the Mole, after he had waited patiently for a few minutes, half-dozing in the hot sun.

But no answer came. He looked, and understood the silence. With a smile of much happiness on his face, and something of a listening look still lingering there, the weary Rat was fast asleep.
WHEN Toad found himself immured in a dank and noisome dungeon, and knew that all the grim darkness of a medieval fortress lay between him and the outer world of sunshine and well-metalled high roads where he had lately been so happy, disporting himself as if he had bought up every road in England, he flung himself at full length on the floor, and shed bitter tears, and abandoned himself to dark despair. This is the end of everything (he said), at least it is the end of the career of Toad, which is the same thing; the popular and handsome Toad, the rich and hospitable Toad, the Toad so free and careless and debonair! How can I hope to be ever set at large again (he said), who have been imprisoned so justly for stealing so handsome a motor-car in such an audacious manner, and for such lurid and imaginative cheek, bestowed upon such a number of fat, red-faced policemen! (Here his sobs choked him.) Stupid animal that I was (he said), now I must languish in this dungeon, till people who were proud to say they knew me, have forgotten the very name of Toad! O wise old Badger! (he said), O clever, intelligent Rat and sensible Mole! What sound judgments, what a knowledge of men and matters you possess! O unhappy and forsaken Toad! With lamentations such as these be passed his days and nights for several weeks, refusing his meals or intermediate light refreshments, though the grim and ancient gaoler, knowing that Toads pockets were well lined, frequently pointed out that many comforts, and indeed luxuries, could by arrangement be sent in- at a price- from outside.

Now the gaoler had a daughter, a pleasant wench and good-hearted, who assisted her father in the lighter duties of his post. She was particularly fond of animals, and, besides her canary, whose cage hung on a nail in the massive wall of the keep by day, to the great annoyance of prisoners who relished an after-dinner nap, and was shrouded in an antimacassar on the parlour table at night, she kept several piebald mice and a restless revolving squirrel. This kind-hearted girl, pitying the misery of Toad, said to her father one day, Father! I cant bear to see that poor beast so unhappy, and getting so thin! You let me have the managing of him.

You know how fond of animals I am. Ill make him eat from my hand, and sit up, and do all sorts of things. Her father replied that she could do what she liked with him. He was tired of Toad, and his sulks and his airs and his meanness. So that day she went on her errand of mercy, and knocked at the door of Toads cell.

Now, cheer up, Toad, she said, coaxingly, on entering, and sit up and dry your eyes and be a sensible animal. And do try and eat a bit of dinner. See, Ive brought you some of mine, hot from the oven! It was bubble-and-squeak, between two plates, and its fragrance filled the narrow cell. The penetrating smell of cabbage reached the nose of Toad as he lay prostrate in his misery on the floor, and gave him the idea, for a moment that perhaps life was not such a blank and desperate thing as he had imagined. But still he wailed, and kicked with his legs, and refused to be comforted. So the wise girl retired for the time, but, of course, a good deal of the smell of hot cabbage remained behind, as it will do, and Toad, between his sobs, sniffed and reflected, and gradually

began to think new and inspiring thoughts: of chivalry, and poetry, and deeds still to be done; of broad meadows, and cattle browsing in them, raked by sun and wind; of kitchen-gardens, and straight herb-borders, and warm snapdragon beset by bees; and of the comforting clink of dishes set down on the table at Toad Hall, and the scrape of chair-legs on the floor as every one pulled himself close up to his work. The air of the narrow cell took a rosy tinge; be began to think of his friends, and how they would surely be able to do something; of lawyers, and how they would have enjoyed his case, and what an ass he had been not to get in a few; and lastly, he thought of his own great cleverness and resource, and all that he was capable of if he only gave his great mind to it; and the cure was almost complete.

When the girl returned, some hours later, she carried a tray, with a cup of fragrant tea steaming on it; and a plate piled up with very hot buttered toast, cut thick, very brown on both sides, with the butter running through the holes in it in great golden drops, like honey from the honeycomb. The smell of that buttered toast simply talked to Toad, and with no uncertain voice; talked of warm kitchens, of breakfasts on bright frosty mornings, of cosy parlour firesides on winter evenings, when ones ramble was over and slippered feet were propped on the fender; of the purring of contented cats, and the twitter of sleepy canaries. Toad sat up on end once more, dried his eyes, sipped his tea and munched his toast, and soon began talking freely about himself, and the house he lived in, and his doings there, and how important he was, and what a lot his friends thought of him.

The gaolers daughter saw that the topic was doing him as much good as the tea, as indeed it was, and encouraged him to go on. Tell me about Toad Hall, said she. It sounds beautiful. Toad Hall, said the Toad proudly, is an eligible self-contained gentlemans residence, very unique; dating in part from the fourteenth century, but replete with every modern convenience. Up-to- date sanitation. Five minutes from church, postoffice, and golf-links, Suitable for- Bless the animal, said the girl, laughing, I dont want to take it. Tell me something real about it. But first wait till I fetch you some more tea and toast. She tripped away, and presently returned with a fresh trayful; and Toad, pitching into the toast with avidity, his spirits quite restored to their usual level, told her about the boat-house, and the fish-pond, and the old walled kitchen-garden; and about the pig-styes, and the stables, and the pigeon-house, and the hen-house; and about the dairy, and the wash- house, and the china-cupboards, and the linenpresses (she liked that bit especially); and about the banqueting-hall, and the fun they had there when the other animals were gathered round the table and Toad was at his best, singing songs, telling stories, carrying on generally. Then she wanted to know about his animal-friends, and was very interested in all he had to tell her about them and how they lived, and what they did to pass their time. Of course, she did not say she was fond of animals as pets, because she had the sense to see that Toad would be extremely offended. When she said good night, having filled his water-jug and shaken up his straw for him, Toad was very much the same sanguine, self-satisfied animal that he had been of old. He sang a little song or two, of the sort he used to sing at his dinner-parties, curled himself up in the straw, and had an excellent nights rest and the pleasantest of dreams.

They had many interesting talks together, after that, as the dreary days went on; and the gaolers daughter grew very sorry for Toad, and thought it a great shame that a poor little animal should be locked up in prison for what seemed to her a very trivial offence. Toad, of course, in his vanity, thought that her interest in him proceeded from a growing tenderness; and he could not help half-regretting that the social gulf between them was so very wide, for she was a comely lass, and evidently admired him very much.

One morning the girl was very thoughtful, and answered at random, and did not seem to Toad to be paying proper attention to his witty sayings and sparkling comments. Toad, she said presently, just listen, please. I have an aunt who is a washerwoman. There, there, said Toad, graciously and affably, never mind; think no more about it. I have several aunts who ought to be washerwomen.

Do be quiet a minute, Toad, said the girl. You talk too much, thats your chief fault, and Im trying to think, and you hurt my head. As I said, I have an aunt who is a washerwoman; she does the washing for all the prisoners in this castle- we try to keep any paying business of that sort in the family, you understand.

She takes out the washing on Monday morning, and brings it in on Friday evening. This is a Thursday. Now, this is what occurs to me: youre very rich- at least youre always telling me so- and shes very poor. A few pounds wouldnt make any difference to you, and it would mean a lot to her. Now, I think if she were properly approached- squared, I believe is the word you animals use- you could come to some arrangement by which she would let you have her dress and bonnet and so on, and you could escape from the castle as the official washerwoman.

Youre very alike in many respects- particularly about the figure. Were not, said the Toad in a huff. I have a very elegant figure- for what I am. So has my aunt, replied the girl, for what she is. But have it your own way. You horrid, proud, ungrateful animal, when Im sorry for you, and trying to help you! Yes, yes, thats all right; thank you very much indeed, said the Toad hurriedly. But look here! you wouldnt surely have Mr. Toad, of Toad Hall, going about the country disguised as a washerwoman! Then you can stop here as a Toad, replied the girl with much spirit. I suppose you want coach-and-four!

Honest Toad was always ready to admit himself in the wrong. You are a good, kind, clever girl, he said, and I am indeed a proud and a stupid toad. Introduce me to your worthy aunt, if you will be so kind, and I have no doubt that the excellent lady and I will be able to arrange terms satisfactory to both parties. Next evening the girl ushered her aunt into Toads cell, bearing his weeks washing pinned up in a towel. The old lady had been prepared beforehand for the interview, and the sight of certain gold sovereigns that Toad had thoughtfully placed on the table in full view practically completed the matter and left little further to discuss. In return for his cash, Toad received a cotton print gown, an apron, a shawl, and a rusty black bonnet; the only stipulation the old lady made being that she should be gagged and bound and dumped down in a corner. By this not very convincing artifice, she explained, aided by picturesque fiction which she could supply herself, she hoped to retain her situation, in spite of the suspicious appearance of things.

Toad was delighted with the suggestion. It would enable him to leave the prison in some style, and with his reputation for being a desperate and dangerous fellow untarnished; and he readily helped the gaolers daughter to make her aunt appear as much as possible the victim of circumstances over which she had no control.

Now its your turn, Toad; said the girl. Take off that coat and waistcoat of yours; youre fat enough as it is. Shaking with laughter, she proceeded to hook-and-eye him into the cotton print gown, arranged the shawl with a professional fold, and tied the strings of the rusty bonnet under his chin.

Youre the very image of her, she giggled, only Im sure you never looked half so respectable in all your life before. Now, good-bye, Toad, and good luck. Go straight down the way you came up; and if any one says anything to you, as they probably will, being but men, you can chaff back a bit, of course, but remember youre a widow woman, quite alone in the world, with a character to lose. With a quaking heart, but as firm a footstep as he could command, Toad set forth cautiously on what seemed to be a most hare-brained and hazardous undertaking; but he was soon agreeably surprised to find how easy everything was made for him, and a little humbled at the thought that both his popularity, and the sex that seemed to inspire it, were really anothers. The washerwomans squat figure in its familiar cotton print seemed a passport for every barred door and grim gateway; even when he hesitated, uncertain as to the right turning to take, he found himself helped out of his difficulty by the warder at the next gate, anxious to be off to his tea, summoning him to come along sharp and not keep him waiting there all night. The chaff and the humourous sallies to which he was subjected, and to which, of course, he had to provide prompt and effective reply, formed, indeed, his chief danger; for Toad was an animal with a strong sense of his own dignity, and the chaff was mostly (he thought) poor and clumsy, and the humour of the sallies entirely lacking. However, he kept his temper, though with great difficulty, suited his retorts to his company and his supposed character, and did his best not to overstep the limits of good taste.

It seemed hours before he crossed the last courtyard, rejected the pressing invitations from the last guardroom, and dodged the outspread arms of the last warder, pleading with simulated passion for just one farewell embrace. But at last he heard the wicket- gate in the great outer door click behind him, felt the fresh air of the outer world upon his anxious brow, and knew that he was free!

Dizzy with the easy success of his daring exploit, he walked quickly towards the lights of the town, not knowing in the least what he should do next, only quite certain of one thing, that he must remove himself as quickly as possible from the neighbourhood where the lady he was forced to represent was so well-known and so popular a character.

As he walked along, considering, his attention was caught by some red and green lights a little way off, to one side of the town, and the sound of the puffing and snorting of engines and the banging of shunted trucks fell on his ear. Aha! he thought, this is a piece of luck! A railway station is the thing I want most in the whole world at this moment; and whats more, I neednt go through the town to get it, and shant have to

support this humiliating character by repartees which, though thoroughly effective, do not assist ones sense of self-respect. He made his way to the station accordingly, consulted a time-table, and found that a train, bound more or less in the direction of his home, was due to start in half-an-hour. More luck! said Toad, his spirits rising rapidly, and went off to the booking-office to buy his ticket.

He gave the name of the station that he knew to be nearest to the village of which Toad Hall was the principal feature, and mechanically put his fingers, in search of the necessary money, where his waistcoat pocket should have been. But here the cotton gown, which had nobly stood by him so far, and which he had basely forgotten, intervened, and frustrated his efforts. In a sort of nightmare he struggled with the strange uncanny thing that seemed to hold his hands, turn all muscular strivings to water, and laugh at him all the time; while other travellers, forming up in a line behind, waited with impatience, making suggestions of more or less value and comments of more or less stringency and point. At last- somehow- he never rightly understood how- he burst the barriers, attained the goal, arrived at where all waistcoat pockets are eternally situated, and found- not only no money, but no pocket to hold it, and no waistcoat to hold the pocket!

To his horror he recollected that he had left both coat and waistcoat behind him in his cell, and with them his pocket-book, money, keys, watch, matches, pencil-case- all that makes life worth living, all that distinguishes the many-pocketed animal, the lord of creation, from the inferior one-pocketed or no-pocketed productions that hop or trip about permissively, unequipped for the real contest.

In his misery he made one desperate effort to carry the thing off, and, with a return to his fine old manner- a blend of the Squire and the College Don- he said, Look here! I find Ive left my purse behind. Just give me that ticket, will you, and Ill send the money on to-morrow? Im well-known in these parts. The clerk stared at him and the rusty black bonnet a moment, and then laughed. I should think you were pretty well known in these parts, he said, if youve tried this game on often. Here, stand away from the window, please, madam; youre obstructing the other passengers An old gentleman who had been prodding him in the back for some moments here thrust him away, and, what was worse, addressed him as his good woman, which angered Toad more than anything that had occurred that evening.

Baffled and full of despair, he wandered blindly down the platform where the train was standing, and tears trickled down each side of his nose. It was hard, he thought, to be within sight of safety and almost of home, and to be baulked by the want of a few wretched shillings and by the pettifogging mistrustfulness of paid officials. Very soon his escape would be discovered, the hunt would be up, he would be caught, reviled, loaded with chains, dragged back again to prison and bread-and-water and straw; his guards and penalities would be doubled; and O, what sarcastic remarks the girl would make! What was to be done? He was not swift of foot; his figure was unfortunately recognisable. Could he not squeeze under the seat of a carriage? He had seen this method adopted by schoolboys, when the journey-money provided by thoughtful parents had been diverted to other and better ends. As he pondered, he found himself

opposite the engine, which was being oiled, wiped, and generally caressed by its affectionate driver, a burly man with an oil-can in one hand and a lump of cotton-waste in the other. Hullo, mother! said the engine-driver whats the trouble? You dont look particularly cheerful. O, sir! said Toad, crying afresh, I am a poor unhappy washerwoman, and Ive lost all my money, and cant pay for a ticket, and I must get home to-night somehow, and whatever I am to do I dont know. O dear, O dear! Thats a bad business, indeed, said the engine-driver reflectively. Lost your money- and cant get home- and got some kids, too, waiting for you, I dare say? Any amount of em, sobbed Toad. And theyll be hungry- and playing with matches- and upsetting lamps, the little innocents!- and quarrelling, and going on generally. O dear, O dear! Well, Ill tell you what Ill do, said the good engine-driver. Youre a washerwoman to your trade, says you. Very well, thats that. And Im an engine-driver, as you well may see, and theres no denying its terribly dirty work. Uses up a power of shirts, it does, till my missus is fair tired of washing of em. If youll wash a few shirts for me when you get home, and send em along, Ill give you a ride on my engine. Its against the Companys regulations, but were not so very particular in these out-of-the-way parts. The Toads misery turned into rapture as he eagerly scrambled up into the cab of the engine. Of course, he had never washed a shirt in his life, and couldnt if he tried and, anyhow, he wasnt going to begin; but he thought: When I get safely home to Toad Hall, and have money again, and pockets to put it in, I will send the engine-driver enough to pay for quite a quantity of washing, and that will be the same thing, or better. The guard waved his welcome flag, the engine-driver whistled in cheerful response, and the train moved out of the station. As the speed increased, and the Toad could see on either side of him real fields, and trees, and hedges, and cows, and horses, all flying past him, and as he thought how every minute was bringing him nearer to Toad Hall, and sympathetic friends, and money to chink in his pocket, and a soft bed to sleep in, and good things to eat, and praise and admiration at the recital of his adventures and his surpassing cleverness, he began to skip up and down and shout and sing snatches of song, to the great astonishment of the engine-driver, who had come across washerwomen before, at long intervals, but never one at all like this.

They had covered many and many a mile, and Toad was already considering what he would have for supper as soon as he got home, when he noticed that the engine-driver, with a puzzled expression on his face, was leaning over the side of the engine and listening hard. Then he saw him climb on to the coals and gaze out over the top of the train; then he returned and said to Toad: Its very strange; were the last train running in this direction to-night, yet I could be sworn that I heard another following us!

Toad ceased his frivolous antics at once. He became grave and depressed, and a dull pain in the lower part of his spine, communicating itself to his legs, made him want to sit down and try desperately not to think of all the possibilities. By this time the moon was shining brightly, and the engine-driver, steadying himself on the coal, could command a view of the line behind them for a long distance. Presently he called out, I can see it clearly now! It is an engine, on our rails, coming along at a great pace! It looks as if we were being pursued! The miserable Toad,

crouching in the coal-dust, tried hard to think of something to do, with dismal want of success. They are gaining on us fast! cried the engine-driver. And the engine is crowded with the queerest lot of people! Men like ancient warders, waving halberds; policemen in their helmets, waving truncheons; and shabbily dressed men in pot-hats, obvious and unmistakable plain-clothes detectives even at this distance, waving revolvers and walking-sticks; all waving, and all shouting the same thing- Stop, stop, stop! Then Toad fell on his knees among the coals and, raising his clasped paws in supplication, cried, Save me, only save me, dear kind Mr. Engine-driver, and I will confess everything! I am not the simple washerwoman I seem to be! I have no children waiting for me, innocent or otherwise! I am a toad- the well-known and popular Mr. Toad, a landed proprietor; I have just escaped, by my great daring and cleverness, from a loathsome dungeon into which my enemies had flung me; and if those fellows on that engine recapture me, it will be chains and breadand-water and straw and misery once more for poor, unhappy, innocent Toad The engine-driver looked down upon him very sternly, and said, Now tell the truth; what were you put in prison for? It was nothing very much, said poor Toad, colouring deeply. I only borrowed a motorcar while the owners were at lunch; they had no need of it at the time. I didnt mean to steal it, really; but people- especially magistrates- take such harsh views of thoughtless and high- spirited actions. The engine-driver looked very grave and said, I fear that you have been indeed a wicked toad, and by rights I ought to give you up to offended justice. But you are evidently in sore trouble and distress, so I will not desert you. I dont hold with motor-cars, for one thing; and I dont hold with being ordered about by policemen when Im on my own engine, for another. And the sight of an animal in tears always makes me feel queer and soft-hearted. So cheer up, Toad! Ill do my best, and we may beat them yet! They piled on more coals, shovelling furiously; the furnace roared, the sparks flew, the engine leapt and swung, but still their pursuers slowly gained. The engine-driver, with a sigh, wiped his brow with a handful of cotton-waste, and said, Im afraid its no good, Toad. You see, they are running light, and they have the better engine. Theres just one thing left for us to do, and its your only chance, so attend very carefully to what I tell you. A short way ahead of us is a long tunnel, and on the other side of that the line passes through a thick wood. Now, I will put on all the speed I can while we are running through the tunnel, but the other fellows will slow down a bit, naturally, for fear of an accident. When we are through, I will shut off steam and put on brakes as hard as I can, and the moment its safe to do so you must jump and hide in the wood, before they get through the tunnel and see you. Then I will go full speed ahead again, and they can chase me if they like, for as long as they like, and as far as they like. Now mind and be ready to jump when I tell you! They piled on more coals, and the train shot into the tunnel, and the engine rushed and roared and rattled, till at last they shot out at the other end into fresh air and the peaceful moonlight, and saw the wood lying dark and helpful upon either side of the line. The driver shut off steam and put on brakes, the Toad got down on the step, and as the train slowed down to almost a walking pace he heard the driver call out, Now, jump! Toad jumped, rolled

down a short embankment, picked himself up unhurt, scrambled into the wood and hid. Peeping out, he saw his train get up speed again and disappear at a great pace. Then out of the tunnel burst the pursuing engine, roaring and whistling, her motley crew waving their various weapons and shouting, Stop! stop! stop! When they were past, the Toad had a hearty laugh- for the first time since he was thrown into prison. But he soon stopped laughing when he came to consider that it was now very late and dark and cold, and he was in an unknown wood, with no money and no chance of supper, and still far from friends and home; and the dead silence of everything, after the roar and rattle of the train, was something of a shock. He dared not leave the shelter of the trees, so he struck into the wood, with the idea of leaving the railway as far as possible behind him.

After so many weeks within walls, he found the wood strange and unfriendly and inclined, he thought, to make fun of him. Night-jars, sounding their mechanical rattle, made him think that the wood was full of searching warders, closing in on him. An owl, swooping noiselessly towards him, brushed his shoulder with its wing, making him jump with the horrid certainty that it was a hand; then flitted off, moth-like, laughing its low ho! ho! ho! which Toad thought in very poor taste. Once he met a fox, who stopped, looked him up and down in a sarcastic sort of way, and said, Hullo, washerwoman! Half a pair of socks and a pillow-case short this week! Mind it doesnt occur again! and swaggered off, sniggering.

Toad looked about for a stone to throw at him, but could not succeed in finding one, which vexed him more than anything. At last, cold, hungry, and tired out, he sought the shelter of a hollow tree, where with branches and dead leaves he made himself as comfortable a bed as he could, and slept soundly till the morning.
THE Water Rat was restless, and he did not exactly know why. To all appearance the summers pomp was still at fullest height, and although in the tilled acres green had given way to gold, though rowans were reddening, and the woods were dashed here and there with a tawny fierceness, yet light and warmth and colour were still present in undiminished measure, clean of any chilly premonitions of the passing year. But the constant chorus of the orchards and hedges had shrunk to a casual evensong from a few yet unwearied performers; the robin was beginning to assert himself once more; and there was a feeling in the air of change and departure. The cuckoo, of course, had long been silent; but many another feathered friend, for months a part of the familiar landscape and its small society, was missing too, and it seemed that the ranks thinned steadily day by day. Rat, ever observant of all winged movement, saw that it was taking daily a southing tendency; and even as he lay in bed at night he thought he could make out, passing in the darkness overhead, the beat and quiver of impatient pinions, obedient to the peremptory call.

Natures Grand Hotel has its Season, like the others. As the guests one by one pack, pay, and depart, and the seats at the table-dhote shrink pitifully at each succeeding meal; as suites of rooms are closed, carpets taken up, and waiters sent away; those boarders who are staying on, en pension, until the next years full reopening, cannot help being somewhat affected by all these flittings and farewells, this eager discussion of plans, routes, and fresh quarters, this daily shrinkage in the stream of comradeship. One gets unsettled, depressed, and inclined to be querulous. Why this craving for change? Why not stay on quietly here, like us, and be jolly? You dont know this hotel out of the season, and what fun we have among ourselves, we fellows who remain and see the whole interesting year out.

All very true, no doubt, the others always reply; we quite envy you- and some other year perhaps- but just now we have engagements- and theres the bus at the door- our time is up! So they depart, with a smile and a nod, and we miss them, and feel resentful. The Rat was a self-sufficing sort of animal, rooted to the land, and, whoever went, he stayed; still, he could not help noticing what was in the air, and feeling some of its influence in his bones.

It was difficult to settle down to anything seriously, with all this flitting going on. Leaving the water-side, where rushes stood thick and tall in a stream that was becoming sluggish and low, he wandered country-wards, crossed a field or two of pasturage already looking dusty and parched, and thrust into the great sea of wheat, yellow, wavy, and murmurous, full of quiet motion and small whisperings.

Here he often loved to wander, through the forest of stiff strong stalks that carried their own golden sky away over his head- a sky that was always dancing, shimmering, softly talking; or swaying strongly to the passing wind and recovering itself with a toss and a merry laugh. Here, too, he had many small friends, a society complete in itself, leading full and busy lives, but always with a spare moment to gossip, and exchange

news with a visitor. Today, however, though they were civil enough, the field-mice and harvest-mice seemed preoccupied. Many were digging and tunnelling busily; others, gathered together in small groups, examined plans and drawings of small flats, stated to be desirable and compact, and situated conveniently near the Stores. Some were hauling out dusty trunks and dress-baskets, others were already elbow-deep packing their belongings; while everywhere piles and bundles of wheat, oats, barley, beech- mast and nuts, lay about ready for transport.

Heres old Ratty! they cried as soon as they saw him. Come and bear a hand, Rat, and dont stand about idle! What sort of games are you up to? said the Water Rat severely. You know it isnt time to be thinking of winter quarters yet, by a long way! O yes, we know that, explained a field-mouse rather shamefacedly; but its always as well to be in good time, isnt it? We really must get all the furniture and baggage and stores moved out of this before those horrid machines begin clicking round the fields; and then, you know, the best flats get picked up so quickly nowadays, and if youre late you have to put up with anything; and they want such a lot of doing up, too, before theyre fit to move into. Of course, were early, we know that; but were only just making a start.

O, bother starts, said the Rat. Its a splendid day. Come for a row, or a stroll along the hedges, or a picnic in the woods, or something. Well, I think not to-day, thank you, replied the field-mouse hurriedly. Perhaps some other day- when weve more time- The Rat, with a snort of contempt, swung round to go, tripped over a hat-box, and fell, with undignified remarks.

If people would be more careful, said a field-mouse rather stiffly, and look where theyre going, people wouldnt hurt themselves- and forget themselves. Mind that hold-all Rat! Youd better sit down somewhere. In an hour or two we may be more free to attend to you. You wont be free as you call it, much this side of Christmas, I can see that, retorted the Rat grumpily, as he picked his way out of the field.

He returned somewhat despondently to his river again- his faithful, steady-going old river, which never packed up, flitted, or went into winter quarters. In the osiers which fringed the bank he spied a swallow sitting. Presently it was joined by another, and then by a third; and the birds, fidgeting restlessly on their bough, talked together earnestly and low.

What, already, said the Rat, strolling up to them. Whats the hurry? I call it simply ridiculous. O, were not off yet, if thats what you mean, replied the first swallow. Were only making plans and arranging things. Talking it over, you know- what route were taking this year, and where well stop, and so on. Thats half the fun! Fun? said the Rat; now thats just what I dont understand. If youve got to leave this pleasant place, and your friends who will miss you, and your snug homes that youve just settled into, why, when the hour strikes Ive no doubt youll go bravely, and face all the trouble and discomfort and change and newness, and make believe that youre not very unhappy. But to want to talk about it, or even think about it, till you really needNo, you dont understand, naturally, said the second swallow. First, we feel it stirring

within us, a sweet unrest; then back come the recollections one by one, like homing pigeons. They flutter through our dreams at night, they fly with us in our wheelings and circlings by day. We hunger to inquire of each other, to compare notes and assure ourselves that it was all really true, as one by one the scents and sounds and names of long-forgotten places come gradually back and beckon to us. Couldnt you stop on for just this year? suggested the Water Rat, wistfully.

Well all do our best to make you feel at home. Youve no idea what good times we have here, while you are far away. I tried stopping on one year, said the third swallow. I had grown so fond of the place that when the time came I hung back and let the others go on without me. For a few weeks it was all well enough, but afterwards, O the weary length of the nights! The shivering, sunless days! The air so clammy and chill, and not an insect in an acre of it! No, it was no good; my courage broke down, and one cold, stormy night I took wing, flying well inland on account of the strong easterly gales. It was snowing hard as I beat through the passes of the great mountains, and I had a stiff fight to win through; but never shall I forget the blissful feeling of the hot sun again on my back as I sped down to the lakes that lay so blue and placid below me, and the taste of my first fat insect! The past was like a bad dream; the future was all happy holiday as I moved southwards week by week, easily, lazily, lingering as long as I dared, but always heeding the call! No! I had had my warning; never again did I think of disobedience. Ah, yes, the call of the South, of the South! twittered the other two dreamily.

Its songs its hues, its radiant air! O, do you remember- and, forgetting the Rat, they slid into passionate reminiscence, while he listened fascinated, and his heart burned within him. In himself, too, he knew that it was vibrating at last, that chord hitherto dormant and unsuspected. The mere chatter of these southernbound birds, their pale and second-hand reports, had yet power to awaken this wild new sensation and thrill him through and through with it; what would one moment of the real thing work in him- one passionate touch of the real southern sun, one waft of the authentic odor? With closed eyes he dared to dream a moment in full abandonment, and when he looked again the river seemed steely and chill, the green fields grey and lightless. Then his loyal heart seemed to cry out on his weaker self for its treachery.

Why do you ever come back, then, at all? he demanded of the swallows jealously. What do you find to attract you in this poor drab little country? And do you think, said the first swallow, that the other call is not for us too, in its due season? The call of lush meadow-grass, wet orchards, warm, insecthaunted ponds, of browsing cattle, of haymaking, and all the farm-buildings clustering round the House of the perfect Eaves? Do you suppose, asked the second one, that you are the only living thing that craves with a hungry longing to hear the cuckoos note again? In due time, said the third, we shall be home-sick once more for quiet waterlilies swaying on the surface of an English stream. But to-day all that seems pale and thin and very far away. Just now our blood dances to other music. They fell a-twittering among themselves once more, and this time their intoxicating babble was of violet seas, tawny sands, and lizard- haunted walls.

Restlessly the Rat wandered off once more, climbed the slope that rose gently from the north bank of the river, and lay looking out towards the great ring of Downs that barred his vision further southwards- his simple horizon hitherto, his Mountains of the Moon, his limit behind which lay nothing he had cared to see or to know. To-day, to him gazing South with a new-born need stirring in his heart, the clear sky over their long low outline seemed to pulsate with promise; to-day, the unseen was everything, the unknown the only real fact of life. On this side of the hills was now the real blank, on the other lay the crowded and coloured panorama that his inner eye was seeing so clearly. What seas lay beyond, green, leaping, and crested! What sun-bathed coasts, along which the white villas glittered against the olive woods! What quiet harbours, thronged with gallant shipping bound for purple islands of wine and spice, islands set low in languorous waters!

He rose and descended river-wards once more; then changed his mind and sought the side of the dusty lane. There, lying half-buried in the thick, cool underhedge tangle that bordered it, he could muse on the metalled road and all the wondrous world that it led to; on all the wayfarers, too, that might have trodden it, and the fortunes and adventures they had gone to seek or found unseeking- out there, beyond- beyond! Footsteps fell on his ear, and the figure of one that walked somewhat wearily came into view; and he saw that it was a Rat, and a very dusty one. The wayfarer, as he reached him, saluted with a gesture of courtesy that had something foreign about it- hesitated a moment- then with a pleasant smile turned from the track and sat down by his side in the cool herbage. He seemed tired, and the Rat let him rest unquestioned, understanding something of what was in his thoughts; knowing, too, the value all animals attach at times to mere silent companionship, when the weary muscles slacken and the mind marks time.

The wayfarer was lean and keen-featured, and somewhat bowed at the shoulders; his paws were thin and long, his eyes much wrinkled at the corners, and he wore small gold ear rings in his neatly-set well-shaped ears. His knitted jersey was of a faded blue, his breeches, patched and stained, were based on a blue foundation, and his small belongings that he carried were tied up in a blue cotton handkerchief.

When he had rested awhile the stranger sighed, snuffed the air, and looked about him. That was clover, that warm whiff on the breeze, he remarked; and those are cows we hear cropping the grass behind us and blowing softly between mouthfuls. There is a sound of distant reapers, and yonder rises a blue line of cottage smoke against the woodland. The river runs somewhere close by, for I hear the call of a moorhen, and I see by your build that youre a freshwater mariner. Everything seems asleep, and yet going on all the time. It is a goodly life that you lead, friend; no doubt the best in the world, if only you are strong enough to lead it! Yes, its the life, the only life, to live, responded the Water Rat dreamily, and without his usual whole-hearted conviction.

I did not say exactly that, replied the stranger cautiously; but no doubt its the best. Ive tried it, and I know. And because Ive just tried it- six months of itand know its the best, here am I, footsore and hungry, tramping away from it, tramping southward, following the old call, back to the old life, the life which is mine and which will not let me go. Is this, then, yet another of them? mused the Rat. And where have you just

come from? he asked. He hardly dared to ask where he was bound for; he seemed to know the answer only too well. Nice little farm, replied the wayfarer, briefly. Upalong in that direction- he nodded northwards. Never mind about it. I had everything I could want- everything I had any right to expect of life, and more; and here I am! Glad to be here all the same, though, glad to be here! So many miles further on the road, so many hours nearer to my hearts desire! His shining eyes held fast to the horizon, and he seemed to be listening for some sound that was wanting from that inland acreage, vocal as it was with the cheerful music of pasturage and farmyard.

You are not one of us, said the Water Rat, nor yet a farmer; nor even, I should judge, of this country. Right, replied the stranger. Im a sea-faring rat, I am, and the port I originally hail from is Constantinople, though Im a sort of a foreigner there too, in a manner of speaking. You will have heard of Constantinople, friend? A fair city, and an ancient and glorious one. And you may have heard, too, of Sigurd, King of Norway, and how he sailed thither with sixty ships, and how he and his men rode up through streets all canopied in their honour with purple and gold; and how the Emperor and Empress came down and banqueted with him on board his ship. When Sigurd returned home, many of his Northmen remained behind and entered the Emperors body-guard, and my ancestor, a Norwegian born, stayed behind too, with the ships that Sigurd gave the Emperor. Seafarers we have ever been, and no wonder; as for me, the city of my birth is no more my home than any pleasant port between there and the London River. I know them all, and they know me. Set me down on any of their quays or foreshores, and I am home again. I suppose you go great voyages, said the Water Rat with growing interest.

Months and months out of sight of land, and provisions running short, and allowanced as to water, and your mind communing with the mighty ocean, and all that sort of thing? By no means, said the Sea Rat frankly. Such a life as you describe would not suit me at all. Im in the coasting trade, and rarely out of sight of land. Its the jolly times on shore that appeal to me, as much as any seafaring. O, those southern seaports! The smell of them, the riding-lights at night, the glamour! Well, perhaps you have chosen the better way, said the Water Rat, but rather doubtfully. Tell me something of your coasting, then, if you have a mind to, and what sort of harvest an animal of spirit might hope to bring home from it to warm his latter days with gallant memories by the fireside; for my life, I confess to you, feels to me to-day somewhat narrow and circumscribed. My last voyage, began the Sea Rat, that landed me eventually in this country, bound with high hopes for my inland farm, will serve as a good example of any of them, and, indeed, as an epitome of my highly-coloured life. Family troubles, as usual, began it. The domestic storm-cone was hoisted, and I shipped myself on board a small trading vessel bound from Constantinople, by classic seas whose every wave throbs with a deathless memory, to the Grecian Islands and the Levant. Those were golden days and balmy nights! In and out of harbour all the time- old friends everywhere- sleeping in some cool temple or ruined cistern during the heat of the day- feasting and song after sundown, under great stars set in a velvet sky! Thence we turned and coasted up the Adriatic, its shores swimming in an atmosphere of amber,

rose, and aquamarine; we lay in wide land-locked harbours, we roamed through ancient and noble cities, until at last one morning, as the sun rose royally behind us, we rode into Venice down a path of gold. O, Venice is a fine city, wherein a rat can wander at his ease and take his pleasure! Or, when weary of wandering, can sit at the edge of the Grand Canal at night, feasting with his friends, when the air is full of music and the sky full of stars, and the lights flash and shimmer on the polished steel prows of the swaying gondolas, packed so that you could walk across the canal on them from side to side! And then the food- do you like shellfish? Well, well, we wont linger over that now. He was silent for a time; and the Water Rat, silent too and enthralled, floated on dream-canals and heard a phantom song pealing high between vaporous grey wave- lapped walls.

Southwards we sailed again at last, continued the Sea Rat, coasting down the Italian shore, till finally we made Palermo, and there I quitted for a long, happy spell on shore. I never stick too long to one ship; one gets narrow-minded and prejudiced. Besides, Sicily is one of my happy hunting-grounds. I know everybody there, and their ways just suit me. I spent many jolly weeks in the island, staying with friends up country. When I grew restless again I took advantage of a ship that was trading to Sardinia and Corsica; and very glad I was to feel the fresh breeze and the sea-spray in my face once more. But isnt it very hot and stuffy, down in the- hold, I think you call it? asked the Water Rat.

The seafarer looked at him with the suspicion of a wink. Im an old hand, he remarked with much simplicity. The captains cabins good enough for me. Its a hard life, by all accounts, murmured the Rat, sunk in deep thought. For the crew it is, replied the seafarer gravely, again with the ghost of a wink.

From Corsica, he went on, I made use of a ship that was taking wine to the mainland. We made Alassio in the evening, lay to, hauled up our wine-casks, and hove them overboard, tied one to the other by a long line. Then the crew took to the boats and rowed shorewards, singing as they went, and drawing after them the long bobbing procession of casks, like a mile of porpoises. On the sands they had horses waiting, which dragged the casks up the steep street of the little town with a fine rush and clatter and scramble. When the last cask was in, we went and refreshed and rested, and sat late into the night, drinking with our friends, and next morning I took to the great olive-woods for a spell and a rest. For now I had done with islands for the time, and ports and shipping were plentiful; so I led a lazy life among the peasants, lying and watching them work, or stretched high on the hillside with the blue Mediterranean far below me. And so at length, by easy stages, and partly on foot, partly by sea, to Marseilles, and the meeting of old shipmates, and the visiting of great ocean-bound vessels, and feasting once more. Talk of shell-fish! Why, sometimes I dream of the shell- fish of Marseilles, and wake up crying! That reminds me, said the polite Water Rat; you happened to mention that you were hungry, and I ought to have spoken earlier. Of course, you will stop and take your midday meal with me? My hole is close by; it is some time past noon, and you are very welcome to whatever there is. Now I call that kind and brotherly of you, said the Sea Rat. I was indeed hungry when I sat down, and ever since I inadvertently happened to mention shellfish, my pangs have been

extreme. But couldnt you fetch it along out here? I am none too fond of going under hatches, unless Im obliged to; and then, while we eat, I could tell you more concerning my voyages and the pleasant life I lead- at least, it is very pleasant to me, and by your attention I judge it commends itself to you; whereas if we go indoors it is a hundred to one that I shall presently fall asleep. That is indeed an excellent suggestion, said the Water Rat, and hurried off home. There he got out the luncheon-basket and packed a simple meal, in which, remembering the strangers origin and preferences, he took care to include a yard of long French bread, a sausage out of which the garlic sang, some cheese which lay down and cried, and a long-necked straw-covered flask wherein lay bottled sunshine shed and garnered on far Southern slopes. Thus laden, he returned with all speed, and blushed for pleasure at the old seamans commendations of his taste and judgment, as together they unpacked the basket and laid out the contents on the grass by the roadside.

The Sea Rat, as soon as his hunger was somewhat assuaged, continued the history of his latest voyage, conducting his simple hearer from port to port of Spain, landing him at Lisbon, Oporto, and Bordeaux, introducing him to the pleasant harbours of Cornwall and Devon, and so up the Channel to that final quayside, where, landing after winds long contrary, storm-driven and weather-beaten, he had caught the first magical hints and heraldings of another Spring, and, fired by these, had sped on a long tramp inland, hungry for the experiment of life on some quiet farmstead, very far from the weary beating of any sea.

Spell-bound and quivering with excitement, the Water Rat followed the Adventurer league by league, over stormy bays, through crowded roadsteads, across harbour bars on a racing tide, up winding rivers that hid their busy little towns round a sudden turn; and left him with a regretful sigh planted at his dull inland farm, about which he desired to hear nothing.

By this time their meal was over, and the Seafarer, refreshed and strengthened, his voice more vibrant, his eye lit with a brightness that seemed caught from some far- away sea-beacon, filled his glass with the red and glowing vintage of the South, and, leaning towards the Water Rat, compelled his gaze and held him, body and soul, while he talked. Those eyes were of the changing foamstreaked grey-green of leaping Northern seas; in the glass shone a hot ruby that seemed the very heart of the South, beating for him who had courage to respond to its pulsation. The twin lights, the shifting grey and the steadfast red, mastered the Water Rat and held him bound, fascinated, powerless. The quiet world outside their rays receded far away and ceased to be. And the talk, the wonderful talk flowed on- or was it speech entirely, or did it pass at times into song- chanty of the sailors weighing the dripping anchor, sonorous hum of the shrouds in a tearing North-Easter, ballad of the fisherman hauling his nets at sundown against an apricot sky, chords of guitar and mandoline from gondola or caique? Did it change into the cry of the wind, plaintive at first, angrily shrill as it freshened, rising to a tearing whistle, sinking to a musical trickle of air from the leech of the bellying sail? All these sounds the spell-bound listener seemed to hear, and with them the hungry complaint of the gulls and the sea-mews, the soft thunder of the breaking wave, the cry of the protesting shingle. Back into speech again it passed, and

with beating heart he was following the adventures of a dozen seaports, the fights, the escapes, the rallies, the comradeships, the gallant undertakings; or he searched islands for treasure, fished in still lagoons and dozed day-long on warm white sand. Of deep- sea fishings he heard tell, and mighty silver gatherings of the mile-long net; of sudden perils, noise of breakers on a moonless night, or the tall bows of the great liner taking shape overhead through the fog; of the merry homecoming, the headland rounded, the harbour lights opened out; the groups seen dimly on the quay, the cheery hail, the splash of the hawser; the trudge up the steep little street towards the comforting glow of red-curtained windows.

Lastly, in his waking dream it seemed to him that the Adventurer had risen to his feet, but was still speaking, still holding him fast with his sea-grey eyes. And now, he was softly saying, I take to the road again, holding on southwestwards for many a long and dusty day; till at last I reach the little grey sea town I know so well, that clings along one steep side of the harbour. There through dark doorways you look down flights of stone steps, overhung by great pink tufts of valerian and ending in a patch of sparkling blue water. The little boats that lie tethered to the rings and stanchions of the old sea-wall are gaily painted as those I clambered in and out of in my own childhood; the salmon leap on the flood tide, schools of mackerel flash and play past quay-sides and foreshores, and by the windows the great vessels glide, night and day, up to their moorings or forth to the open sea. There, sooner or later, the ships of all seafaring nations arrive; and there, at its destined hour, the ship of my choice will let go its anchor. I shall take my time, I shall tarry and bide, till at last the right one lies waiting for me, warped out into midstream, loaded low, her bowsprit pointing down harbour. I shall slip on board, by boat or along hawser; and then one morning I shall wake to the song and tramp of the sailors, the clink of the capstan, and the rattle of the anchor-chain coming merrily in. We shall break out the jib and the foresail, the white houses on the harbour side will glide slowly past us as she gathers steering-way, and the voyage will have begun! As she forges towards the headland she will clothe herself with canvas; and then, once outside, the sounding slap of great green seas as she heels to the wind, pointing South!

And you, you will come too, young brother; for the days pass, and never return, and the South still waits for you. Take the Adventure, heed the call, now ere the irrevocable moment passes! Tis but a banging of the door behind you, a blithesome step forward, and you are out of the old life and into the new! Then some day, some day long hence, jog home here if you will, when the cup has been drained and the play has been played, and sit down by your quiet river with a store of goodly memories for company. You can easily overtake me on the road, for you are young, and I am ageing and go softly. I will linger, and look back; and at last I will surely see you coming, eager and light-hearted, with all the South in your face! The voice died away and ceased as an insects tiny trumpet dwindles swiftly into silence; and the Water Rat, paralysed and staring, saw at last but a distant speck on the white surface of the road.

Mechanically he rose and proceeded to repack the luncheon-basket, carefully and without haste. Mechanically he returned home, gathered together a few small necessaries and special treasures he was fond of, and put them in a satchel; acting with

slow deliberation, moving about the room like a sleep-walker; listening ever with parted lips. He swung the satchel over his shoulder, carefully selected a stout stick for his wayfaring, and with no haste, but with no hesitation at all, he stepped across the threshold just as the Mole appeared at the door.

Why, where are you off to, Ratty? asked the Mole in great surprise, grasping him by the arm. Going South, with the rest of them, murmured the Rat in a dreamy monotone, never looking at him. Seawards first and then on shipboard, and so to the shores that are calling me! He pressed resolutely forward, still without haste, but with dogged fixity of purpose; but the Mole, now thoroughly alarmed, placed himself in front of him, and looking into his eyes saw that they were glazed and set and turned a streaked and shifting grey- not his friends eyes, but the eyes of some other animal! Grappling with him strongly he dragged him inside, threw him down, and held him.

The Rat struggled desperately for a few moments, and then his strength seemed suddenly to leave him, and he lay still and exhausted, with closed eyes, trembling. Presently the Mole assisted him to rise and placed him in a chair, where he sat collapsed and shrunken into himself, his body shaken by a violent shivering, passing in time into an hysterical fit of dry sobbing. Mole made the door fast, threw the satchel into a drawer and locked it, and sat down quietly on the table by his friend, waiting for the strange seizure to pass. Gradually the Rat sank into a troubled doze, broken by starts and confused murmurings of things strange and wild and foreign to the unenlightened Mole; and from that he passed into a deep slumber.

Very anxious in mind, the Mole left him for a time and busied himself with household matters; and it was getting dark when he returned to the parlour and found the Rat where he had left him, wide awake indeed, but listless, silent, and dejected. He took one hasty glance at his eyes; found them, to his great gratification, clear and dark and brown again as before; and then sat down and tried to cheer him up and help him to relate what had happened to him.

Poor Ratty did his best, by degrees, to explain things; but how could he put into cold words what had mostly been suggestion? How recall, for anothers benefit, the haunting sea voices that had sung to him, how reproduce at second-hand the magic of the Seafarers hundred reminiscences? Even to himself, now the spell was broken and the glamour gone, he found it difficult to account for what had seemed, some hours ago, the inevitable and only thing. It is not surprising, then, that he failed to convey to the Mole any clear idea of what he had been through that day.

To the Mole this much was plain: the fit, or attack, had passed away, and had left him sane again, though shaken and cast down by the reaction. But he seemed to have lost all interest for the time in the things that went to make up his daily life, as well as in all pleasant forecastings of the altered days and doings that the changing season was surely bringing.

Casually, then, and with seeming indifference, the Mole turned his talk to the harvest that was being gathered in, the towering wagons and their straining teams, the growing ricks, and the large moon rising over bare acres dotted with sheaves.

He talked of the reddening apples around, of the browning nuts, of jams and preserves and the distilling of cordials; till by easy stages such as these he reached midwinter, its hearty joys and its snug home life, and then he became simply lyrical. By degrees the Rat began to sit up and to join in. His dull eye brightened, and he lost some of his listening air.

Presently the tactful Mole slipped away and returned with a pencil and a few half- sheets of paper, which he placed on the table at his friends elbow. Its quite a long time since you did any poetry, he remarked. You might have a try at it this evening, instead of- well, brooding over things so much. Ive an idea that youll feel a lot better when youve got something jotted down- if its only just the rhymes. The Rat pushed the paper away from him wearily, but the discreet Mole took occasion to leave the room, and when he peeped in again some time later, the Rat was absorbed and deaf to the world; alternately scribbling and sucking the top of his pencil. It is true that he sucked a good deal more than he scribbled; but it was joy to the Mole to know that the cure had at least begun.
THE front door of the hollow tree faced eastwards, so Toad was called at an early hour; partly by the bright sunlight streaming in on him, partly by the exceeding coldness of his toes, which made him dream that he was at home in bed in his own handsome room with the Tudor window, on a cold winters night, and his bedclothes had got up, grumbling and protesting they couldnt stand the cold any longer, and had run downstairs to the kitchen fire to warm themselves; and he had followed, on bare feet, along miles and miles of icy stone-paved passages, arguing and beseeching them to be reasonable. He would probably have been aroused much earlier, had he not slept for some weeks on straw over stone flags, and almost forgotten the friendly feeling of thick blankets pulled well up round the chin.

Sitting up, he rubbed his eyes first and his complaining toes next, wondered for a moment where he was, looking round for familiar stone wall and little barred window; then, with a leap of the heart, remembered everything- his escape, his flight, his pursuit; remembered, first and best thing of all, that he was free!

Free! The word and the thought alone were worth fifty blankets. He was warm from end to end as he thought of the jolly world outside, waiting eagerly for him to make his triumphal entrance, ready to serve him and play up to him, anxious to help him and to keep him company, as it always had been in days of old before misfortune fell upon him. He shook himself and combed the dry leaves out of his hair with his fingers; and, his toilet complete, marched forth into the comfortable morning sun, cold but confident, hungry but hopeful, all nervous terrors of yesterday dispelled by rest and sleep and frank and heartening sunshine.

He had the world all to himself, that early summer morning. The dewy woodland, as he threaded it, was solitary and still: the green fields that succeeded the trees were his own to do as he liked with; the road itself, when he reached it, in that loneliness that was everywhere, seemed, like a stray dog, to be looking anxiously for company. Toad, however, was looking for something that could talk, and tell him clearly which way he ought to go. It is all very well, when you have a light heart, and a clear conscience, and money in your pocket, and nobody scouring the country for you to drag you off to prison again, to follow where the road beckons and points, not caring whither. The practical Toad cared very much indeed, and he could have kicked the road for its helpless silence when every minute was of importance to him.

The reserved rustic road was presently joined by a shy little brother in the shape of a canal, which took its hand and ambled along by its side in perfect confidence, but with the same tongue-tied, uncommunicative attitude towards strangers. Bother them! said Toad to himself. But, anyhow, one things clear. They must both be coming from somewhere, and going to somewhere. You cant get over that, Toad, my boy! So he marched on patiently by the waters edge.

Round a bend in the canal came plodding a solitary horse, stooping forward as if in anxious thought. From rope traces attached to his collar stretched a long line, taut, but dipping with his stride, the further part of it dripping pearly drops. Toad let the horse pass, and stood waiting for what the fates were sending him.

With a pleasant swirl of quiet water at its blunt bow the barge slid up alongside of him, its gaily painted gunwale level with the towing-path, its sole occupant a big stout woman wearing a linen sun-bonnet, one brawny arm laid along the tiller. A nice morning, maam! she remarked to Toad, as she drew up level with him.

I dare say it is, maam! responded Toad politely, as he walked along the towpath abreast of her. I dare it is a nice morning to them thats not in sore trouble, like what I am. Heres my married daughter, she sends off to me post-haste to come to her at once; so off I comes, not knowing what may be happening or going to happen, but fearing the worst, as you will understand, maam, if youre a mother, too. And Ive left my business to look after itself- Im in the washing and laundering line, you must know, maam- and Ive left my young children to look after themselves, and a more mischievous and troublesome set of young imps doesnt exist, maam; and Ive lost all my money, and lost my way, and as for what may be happening to my married daughter, why, I dont like to think of it, maam! Where might your married daughter be living, maam? asked the bargewoman.

She lives near to the river, maam, replied Toad. Close to a fine house called Toad Hall, thats somewheres hereabouts in these parts. Perhaps you may have heard of it. Toad Hall? Why, Im going that way myself, replied the barge-woman. This canal joins the river some miles further on, a little above Toad Hall; and then its an easy walk. You come along in the barge with me, and Ill give you a lift. She steered the barge close to the bank, and Toad, with many humble and grateful acknowledgments, stepped lightly on board and sat down with great satisfaction. Toads luck again! thought he. I always come out on top! So youre in the washing business, maam? said the barge-woman politely, as they glided along. And a very good business youve got too, I dare say, if Im not making too free in saying so. Finest business in the whole country, said Toad airily. All the gentry come to me- wouldnt go to any one else if they were paid, they know me so well. You see, I understand my work thoroughly, and attend to it all myself. Washing, ironing, clear-starching, making up gents fine shirts for evening wear- everythings done under my own eye! But surely you dont do all that work yourself, maam? asked the bargewoman respectfully.

O, I have girls, said Toad lightly: twenty girls or thereabouts, always at work. But you know what girls are, maam! Nasty little hussies, thats what I call em! So do I, too, said the barge-woman with great heartiness. But I dare say you set yours to rights, the idle trollops! And are you very fond of washing? I love it, said Toad. I simply dote on it. Never so happy as when Ive got both arms in the wash-tub. But, then, it comes so easy to me! No trouble at all! A real pleasure, I assure you, maam! What a bit of luck, meeting you! observed the barge-woman, thoughtfully.

A regular piece of good fortune for both of us! Why, what do you mean? asked Toad, nervously .

Well, look at me, now, replied the barge-woman. I like washing, too, just the same as you do; and for that matter, whether I like it or not I have got to do all my own, naturally, moving about as I do. Now my husband, hes such a fellow for shirking his work and leaving the barge to me, that never a moment do I get for seeing to my own affairs. By rights he ought to be here now, either steering or attending to the horse, though luckily the horse has sense enough to attend to himself. Instead of which, hes gone off with the dog, to see if they cant pick up a rabbit for dinner somewhere. Says hell catch me up at the next lock. Well, thats as may be- I dont trust him, once he gets off with that dog, whos worse than he is. But meantime, how am I to get on with my washing? O, never mind about the washing, said Toad, not liking the subject. Try and fix your mind on that rabbit. A nice fat young rabbit, Ill be bound. Got any onions? I cant fix my mind on anything but my washing, said the barge-woman, and I wonder you can be talking of rabbits, with such a joyful prospect before you. Theres a heap of things of mine that youll find in a corner of the cabin. If youll just take one or two of the most necessary sort- I wont venture to describe them to a lady like you, but youll recognise them at a glance- and put them through the wash-tub as we go along, why, itll be a pleasure to you, as you rightly say, and a real help to me. Youll find a tub handy, and soap, and a kettle on the stove, and a bucket to haul up water from the canal with. Then I shall know youre enjoying yourself, instead of sitting here idle, looking at the scenery and yawning your head off. Here, you let me steer! said Toad, now thoroughly frightened, and then you can get on with your washing your own way. I might spoil your things, or not do em as you like. Im more used to gentlemens things myself. Its my special line. Let you steer? replied the barge-woman, laughing. It takes some practice to steer a barge properly. Besides, its dull work, and I want you to be happy. No, you shall do the washing you are so fond of, and Ill stick to the steering that I understand. Dont try and deprive me of the pleasure of giving you a treat! Toad was fairly cornered. He looked for escape this way and that, saw that he was too far from the bank for a flying leap, and sullenly resigned himself to his fate. If it comes to that, he thought in desperation, I suppose any fool can wash! He fetched tub, soap, and other necessaries from the cabin, selected a few garments at random, tried to recollect what he had seen in casual glances through laundry windows, and set to.

A long half-hour passed, and every minute of it saw Toad getting crosser and crosser. Nothing that he could do to the things seemed to please them or do them good. He tried coaxing, he tried slapping, he tried punching; they smiled back at him out of the tub unconverted, happy in their original sin. Once or twice he looked nervously over his shoulder at the barge-woman, but she appeared to be gazing out in front of her, absorbed in her steering. His back ached badly, and he noticed with dismay that his paws were beginning to get all crinkly. Now Toad was very proud of his paws. He muttered under his breath words that should never pass the lips of either washerwomen or Toads; and lost the soap, for the fiftieth time.

A burst of laughter made him straighten himself and look round. The bargewoman was leaning back and laughing unrestrainedly, till the tears ran down her cheeks.

Ive been watching you all the time, she gasped. I thought you must be a humbug all along, from the conceited way you talked. Pretty washerwoman you are! Never washed so much as a dish-clout in your life, Ill lay! Toads temper which had been simmering viciously for some time, now fairly boiled over, and he lost all control of himself.

You common, low, fat barge-woman! he shouted; dont you dare to talk to your betters like that! Washerwoman indeed! I would have you to know that I am a Toad, a very well-known, respected, distinguished Toad! I may be under a bit of a cloud at present, but I will not be laughed at by a barge-woman! The woman moved nearer to him and peered under his bonnet keenly and closely. Why, so you are! she cried. Well, I never! A horrid, nasty, crawly Toad! And in my nice clean barge, too! Now that is a thing that I will not have. She relinquished the tiller for a moment. One big mottled arm shot out and caught Toad by a fore-leg, while the other gripped him fast by a hind- leg. Then the world turned suddenly upside down, the barge seemed to flit lightly across the sky, the wind whistled in his ears, and Toad found himself flying through the air, revolving rapidly as he went.

The water, when he eventually reached it with a loud splash, proved quite cold enough for his taste, though its chill was not sufficient to quell his proud spirit, or slake the heat of his furious temper. He rose to the surface spluttering, and when he had wiped the duckweed out of his eyes the first thing he saw was the fat barge-woman looking back at him over the stern of the retreating barge and laughing; and he vowed, as he coughed and choked, to be even with her.

He struck out for the shore, but the cotton gown greatly impeded his efforts, and when at length he touched land he found it hard to climb up the steep bank unassisted. He had to take a minute or twos rest to recover his breath; then, gathering his wet skirts well over his arms, he started to run after the barge as fast as his legs would carry him, wild with indignation, thirsting for revenge.

The barge-woman was still laughing when he drew up level with her. Put yourself through your mangle, washerwoman, she called out, and iron your face and crimp it, and youll pass for quite a decent-looking Toad! Toad never paused to reply. Solid revenge was what he wanted, not cheap, windy, verbal triumphs, though he had a thing or two in his mind that he would have liked to say. He saw what he wanted ahead of him. Running swiftly on he overtook the horse, unfastened the tow-rope and cast off, jumped lightly on the horses back, and urged it to a gallop by kicking it vigorously in the sides. He steered for the open country, abandoning the tow-path, and swinging his steed down a rutty lane. Once he looked back, and saw that the barge had run aground on the other side of the canal, and the barge-woman was gesticulating wildly and shouting, Stop, stop, stop! Ive heard that song before, said Toad, laughing, as he continued to spur his steed onward in its wild career.

The barge-horse was not capable of any very sustained effort, and its gallop soon subsided into a trot, and its trot into an easy walk; but Toad was quite contented with this, knowing that he, at any rate, was moving, and the barge was not. He had quite recovered his temper, now that he had done something he thought really clever; and he was satisfied to jog along quietly in the sun, steering his horse along by-

ways and bridle-paths, and trying to forget how very long it was since he had had a square meal, till the canal had been left very far behind him. He had travelled some miles, his horse and he, and he was feeling drowsy in the hot sunshine, when the horse stopped, lowered his head, and began to nibble the grass; and Toad, waking up, just saved himself from falling off by an effort.

He looked about him and found he was on a wide common, dotted with patches of gorse and bramble as far as he could see. Near him stood a dingy gipsy caravan, and beside it a man was sitting on a bucket turned upside down, very busy smoking and staring into the wide world. A fire of sticks was burning near by, and over the fire hung an iron pot, and out of that pot came forth bubblings and gurglings, and a vague suggestive steaminess. Also smells- warm, rich, and varied smells- that twined and twisted and wreathed themselves at last into one complete, voluptuous, perfect smell that seemed like the very soul of Nature taking form and appearing to her children, a true Goddess, a mother of solace and comfort. Toad now knew well that he had not been really hungry before. What he had felt earlier in the day had been a mere trifling qualm. This was the real thing at last, and no mistake; and it would have to be dealt with speedily, too, or there would be trouble for somebody or something. He looked the gipsy over carefully, wondering vaguely whether it would be easier to fight him or cajole him. So there he sat, and sniffed and sniffed, and looked at the gipsy; and the gipsy sat and smoked, and looked at him.

Presently the gipsy took his pipe out of his mouth and remarked in a careless way, Want to sell that there horse of yours? Toad was completely taken aback. He did not know that gipsies were very fond of horse-dealing, and never missed an opportunity, and he had not reflected that caravans were always on the move and took a deal of drawing. It had not occurred to him to turn the horse into cash, but the gipsys suggestion seemed to smooth the way towards the two things he wanted so badly- ready money, and a solid breakfast.

What? he said, me sell this beautiful young horse of mine? O, no; its out of the question. Whos going to take the washing home to my customers every week? Besides, Im too fond of him, and he simply dotes on me. Try and love a donkey, suggested the gipsy. Some people do. You dont seem to see, continued Toad, that this fine horse of mine is a cut above you altogether. Hes a blood horse, he is, partly; not the part you see, of course- another part.

And hes been a Prize Hackney, too, in his time- that was the time before you knew him, but you can still tell it on him at a glance, if you understand anything about horses. No, its not to be thought of for a moment. All the same, how much might you be disposed to offer me for this beautiful young horse of mine? The gipsy looked the horse over, and then he looked Toad over with equal care, and looked at the horse again. Shillin a leg, he said briefly, and turned away, continuing to smoke and try to stare the wide world out of countenance.

A shilling a leg? cried Toad. If you please, I must take a little time to work that out, and see just what it comes to. He climbed down off his horse, and left it to graze, and sat down by the gipsy, and did sums on his fingers, and at last he said, A shilling a leg? Why, that comes to exactly four shillings, and no more. O, no; I could not think of

accepting four shillings for this beautiful young horse of mine. Well, said the gipsy, Ill tell you what I will do. Ill make it five shillings, and thats three-and-sixpence more than the animals worth. And thats my last word. Then Toad sat and pondered long and deeply. For he was hungry and quite penniless, and still some way- he knew not how far- from home, and enemies might still be looking for him. To one in such a situation, five shillings may very well appear a large sum of money. On the other hand, it did not seem very much to get for a horse. But then, again, the horse hadnt cost him anything; so whatever he got was all clear profit. At last he said firmly, Look here, gipsy! I tell you what we will do; and this is my last word. You shall hand me over six shillings and sixpence, cash down; and further, in addition thereto, you shall give me as much breakfast as I can possibly eat, at one sitting of course, out of that iron pot of yours that keeps sending forth such delicious and exciting smells. In return, I will make over to you my spirited young horse, with all the beautiful harness and trappings that are on him, freely thrown in. If thats not good enough for you, say so, and Ill be getting on. I know a man near here whos wanted this horse of mine for years. The gipsy grumbled frightfully, and declared if he did a few more deals of that sort hed be ruined. But in the end he lugged a dirty canvas bag out of the depths of his trouser pocket, and counted out six shillings and sixpence into Toads paw. Then he disappeared into the caravan for an instant, and returned with a large iron plate and a knife, fork, and spoon. He tilted up the pot, and a glorious stream of hot rich stew gurgled into the plate. It was, indeed, the most beautiful stew in the world, being made of partridges, and pheasants, and chickens, and hares, and rabbits, and pea-hens, and guinea-fowls, and one or two other things. Toad took the plate on his lap, almost crying, and stuffed, and stuffed, and stuffed, and kept asking for more, and the gipsy never grudged it him. He thought that he had never eaten so good a breakfast in all his life.

When Toad had taken as much stew on board as he thought he could possibly hold, he got up and said good-bye to the gipsy, and took an affectionate farewell of the horse; and the gipsy, who knew the riverside well, gave him directions which way to go, and he set forth on his travels again in the best possible spirits.

He was, indeed, a very different Toad from the animal of an hour ago. The sun was shining brightly, his wet clothes were quite dry again, he had money in his pocket once more, he was nearing home and friends and safety, and, most and best of all, he had had a substantial meal, hot and nourishing, and felt big, and strong, and careless, and self-confident.

As he tramped along gaily, he thought of his adventures and escapes, and how when things seemed at their worst he had always managed to find a way out; and his pride and conceit began to swell within him. Ho, ho! he said to himself as he marched along with his chin in the air, what a clever Toad I am! There is surely no animal equal to me for cleverness in the whole world! My enemies shut me up in prison, encircled by sentries, watched night and day by warders; I walk out through them all, by sheer ability coupled with courage. They pursue me with engines, and policemen, and revolvers; I snap my fingers at them, and vanish, laughing, into space. I am, unfortunately, thrown into a canal by a woman fat of body and very evil-minded. What

of it? I swim ashore, I seize her horse, I ride off in triumph, and I sell the horse for a whole pocketful of money and an excellent breakfast! Ho, ho! I am The Toad, the handsome, the popular, the successful Toad! He got so puffed up with conceit that he made up a song as he walked in praise of himself, and sang it at the top of his voice, though there was no one to hear it but him. It was perhaps the most conceited song that any animal ever composed.

The world has held great Heroes, As history-books have showed; But never a name to go down to fame Compared with that of Toad! The clever men at Oxford Know all that there is to be knowed. But they none of them know one half as much As intelligent Mr. Toad!

The animals sat in the Ark and cried, Their tears in torrents flowed. Who was it said, Theres land ahead? Encouraging Mr. Toad! The army all saluted As they marched along the road. Was it the King? Or Kitchener? No. It was Mr. Toad.

The Queen and her Ladies-in-waiting Sat at the window and sewed. She cried, Look! whos that handsome man? They answered, Mr. Toad. 0h there was a great deal more of the same sort, but too dreadfully conceited to be written down. These are some of the milder verses. He sang as he walked, and he walked as he sang, and got more inflated every minute. But his pride was shortly to have a severe fall. After some miles of country lanes he reached the high road, and as he turned into it and glanced along its white length, he saw approaching him a speck that turned into a dot and then into a blob, and then into something very familiar; and a double note of warning, only too well known, fell on his delighted ear. This is something like! said the excited Toad. This is real life again, this is once more the great world from which I have been missed so long! I will hail them, my brothers of the wheel, and pitch them a yarn, of the sort that has been so successful hitherto; and they will give me a lift, of course, and then I will talk to them some more; and, perhaps, with luck, it may even end in my driving up to Toad Hall in a motor-car! That will be one in the eye for Badger! He stepped confidently out into the road to hail the motor- car, which came along at an easy pace, slowing down as it neared the lane; when suddenly he became very pale, his heart turned to water, his knees shook and yielded under him, and he doubled up and collapsed with a sickening pain in his interior. And well he might, the unhappy animal; for the approaching car was the very one he had stolen out of the yard of the Red Lion Hotel on that fatal day when all his troubles began! And the people in it were the very same people he had sat and watched at luncheon in the coffee-room! He sank down in a shabby, miserable heap in the road, murmuring to himself in his despair, Its all up! Its all over now! Chains and policemen again! Prison again! Dry bread and water again! O, what a fool I have been! What did I want to go strutting about the country for, singing conceited songs, and hailing people in broad day on the high road, instead of hiding till nightfall and slipping home quietly by back ways! O hapless Toad! O ill-fated animal! The terrible motor-car drew slowly nearer and nearer, till at last he heard it stop just short of him. Two gentlemen got out and walked

round the trembling heap of crumpled misery lying in the road, and one of them said, O dear! this is very sad! Here is a poor old thing- a washerwoman apparently- who has fainted in the road! Perhaps she is overcome by the heat, poor creature; or possibly she has not had any food to-day. Let us lift her into the car and take her to the nearest village, where doubtless she has friends. They tenderly lifted Toad into the motor-car and propped him up with soft cushions, and proceeded on their way.

When Toad heard them talk in so kind and sympathetic a way, and knew that he was not recognised, his courage began to revive, and he cautiously opened first one eye and then the other. Look! said one of the gentlemen, she is better already. The fresh air is doing her good. How do you feel now, maam? Thank you kindly, Sir, said Toad in a feeble voice, Im feeling a great deal better! Thats right, said the gentleman. Now keep quite still, and, above all, dont try to talk.

I wont, said Toad. I was only thinking, if I might sit on the front seat there, beside the driver, where I could get the fresh air full in my face, I should soon be all right again. What a very sensible woman! said the gentleman. Of course you shall. So they carefully helped Toad into the front seat beside the driver, and on they went again. Toad was almost himself again by now. He sat up, looked about him, and tried to beat down the tremors, the yearnings, the old cravings that rose up and beset him and took possession of him entirely.

It is fate! he said to himself. Why strive? why struggle? and he turned to the driver at his side. Please, Sir, he said, I wish you would kindly let me try and drive the car for a little. Ive been watching you carefully, and it looks so easy and so interesting, and I should like to be able to tell my friends that once I had driven a motor-car! The driver laughed at the proposal, so heartily that the gentleman inquired what the matter was. When he heard, he said, to Toads delight, Bravo, maam! I like your spirit. Let her have a try, and look after her. She wont do any harm. Toad eagerly scrambled into the seat vacated by the driver, took the steeringwheel in his hands, listened with affected humility to the instructions given him, and set the car in motion, but very slowly and carefully at first, for he was determined to be prudent.

The gentlemen behind clapped their hands and applauded, and Toad heard them saying, How well she does it! Fancy a washerwoman driving a car as well as that, the first time! Toad went a little faster; then faster still, and faster. He heard the gentlemen call out warningly, Be careful, washerwoman! And this annoyed him, and he began to lose his head.

The driver tried to interfere, but he pinned him down in his seat with one elbow, and put on full speed. The rush of air in his face, the hum of the engines, and the light jump of the car beneath him intoxicated his weak brain. Washerwoman, indeed! he shouted recklessly. Ho! ho! I am the Toad, the motor-car snatcher, the prison-breaker, the Toad who always escapes! Sit still, and you shall know what driving really is, for you are in the hands of the famous, the skilful, the entirely fearless Toad! With a cry of horror the whole party rose and flung themselves on him. Seize him! they cried, seize the Toad, the wicked animal who stole our motor-car! Bind him, chain him, drag him to the

nearest police-station! Down with the desperate and dangerous Toad! Alas! they should have thought, they ought to have been more prudent, they should have remembered to stop the motor-car somehow before playing any pranks of that sort. With a half-turn of the wheel the Toad sent the car crashing through the low hedge that ran along the roadside. One mighty bound, a violent shock, and the wheels of the car were churning up the thick mud of a horse-pond.

Toad found himself flying through the air with the strong upward rush and delicate curve of a swallow. He liked the motion, and was just beginning to wonder whether it would go on until he developed wings and turned into a Toad-bird, when he landed on his back with a thump, in the soft rich grass of a meadow. Sitting up, he could just see the motor-car in the pond, nearly submerged; the gentlemen and the driver, encumbered by their long coats, were floundering helplessly in the water.

He picked himself up rapidly, and set off running across country as hard as he could, scrambling through hedges, jumping ditches, pounding across fields, till he was breathless and weary, and had to settle down into an easy walk. When he had recovered his breath somewhat, and was able to think calmly, he began to giggle, and from giggling he took to laughing, and he laughed till he had to sit down under a hedge. Ho, ho! he cried, in ecstasies of self-admiration, Toad again! Toad, as usual, comes out on the top! Who was it got them to give him a lift? Who managed to get on the front seat for the sake of fresh air? Who persuaded them into letting him see if he could drive? Who landed them all in a horse-pond? Who escaped, flying gaily and unscathed through the air, leaving the narrow-minded, grudging, timid excursionists in the mud where they should rightly be? Why, Toad, of course; clever Toad, great Toad, good Toad!

Then he burst into song again, and chanted with uplifted voice: The motor-car went Poop-poop-poop, As it raced along the road. Who was it steered it into a pond? Ingenious Mr. Toad! O, how clever I am! How clever, how clever, how very clev- A slight noise at a distance behind him made him turn his head and look. O horror! O misery! O despair! About two fields off, a chauffeur in his leather gaiters and two large rural policemen were visible, running towards him as hard as they could go!

Poor Toad sprang to his feet and pelted away again, his heart in his mouth. O, my! he gasped, as he panted along, what an ass I am! What a conceited and heedless ass! Swaggering again! Shouting and singing songs again! Sitting still and gassing again! O my! O my! O my! He glanced back, and saw to his dismay that they were gaining on him. On he ran desperately, but kept looking back, and saw that they still gained steadily. He did his best, but he was a fat animal, and his legs were short, and still they gained. He could hear them close behind him now. Ceasing to heed where he was going, he struggled on blindly and wildly, looking back over his shoulder at the now triumphant enemy, when suddenly the earth failed under his feet, he grasped at the air, and, splash! he found himself head over ears in deep water, rapid water, water that bore him along with a force he could not contend with; and he knew that in his blind panic he had run straight into the river!

He rose to the surface and tried to grasp the reeds and the rushes that grew along the waters edge close under the bank, but the stream was so strong that it tore them out of his hands. O my! gasped poor Toad, if ever I steal a motor-car again! If ever I sing another conceited song- then down he went, and came up breathless and spluttering. Presently he saw that he was approaching a big dark hole in the bank, just above his head, and as the stream bore him past he reached up with a paw and caught hold of the edge and held on. Then slowly and with difficulty he drew himself up out of the water, till at last he was able to rest his elbows on the edge of the hole. There he remained for some minutes, puffing and panting, for he was quite exhausted.

As he sighed and blew and stared before him into the dark hole, some bright small thing shone and twinkled in its depths, moving towards him. As it approached, a face grew up gradually around it, and it was a familiar face! Brown and small, with whiskers.

Grave and round, with neat ears and silky hair. It was the Water Rat!
THE Rat put out a neat little brown paw, gripped Toad firmly by the scruff of the neck, and gave a great hoist and a pull; and the water-logged Toad came up slowly but surely over the edge of the hole, till at last he stood safe and sound in the hall, streaked with mud and weed to be sure, and with the water streaming off him, but happy and high-spirited as of old, now that he found himself once more in the house of a friend, and dodgings and evasions were over, and he could lay aside a disguise that was unworthy of his position and wanted such a lot of living up to.

O, Ratty! he cried. Ive been through such times since I saw you last, you cant think! Such trials, such sufferings, and all so nobly borne! Then such escapes, such disguises such subterfuges, and all so cleverly planned and carried out! Been in prison- got out of it, of course! Been thrown into a canal- swam ashore! Stole a horse- sold him for a large sum of money! Humbugged everybodymade em all do exactly what I wanted! Oh, I am a smart Toad, and no mistake! What do you think my last exploit was? Just hold on till I tell you- Toad, said the Water Rat, gravely and firmly, you go off upstairs at once, and take off that old cotton rag that looks as if it might formerly have belonged to some washerwoman, and clean yourself thoroughly, and put on some of my clothes, and try and come down looking like a gentleman if you can; for a more shabby, bedraggled, disreputable-looking object than you are I never set eyes on in my whole life! Now, stop swaggering and arguing, and be off! Ill have something to say to you later! Toad was at first inclined to stop and do some talking back at him. He had had enough of being ordered about when he was in prison, and here was the thing being begun all over again, apparently; and by a Rat, too! However, he caught sight of himself in the looking-glass over the hat-stand, with the rusty black bonnet perched rakishly over one eye, and he changed his mind and went very quickly and humbly upstairs to the Rats dressing-room. There he had a thorough wash and brush-up, changed his clothes, and stood for a long time before the glass, contemplating himself with pride and pleasure, and thinking what utter idiots all the people must have been to have ever mistaken him for one moment for a washerwoman.

By the time he came down again luncheon was on the table, and very glad Toad was to see it, for he had been through some trying experiences and had taken much hard exercise since the excellent breakfast provided for him by the gipsy. While they ate Toad told the Rat all his adventures, dwelling chiefly on his own cleverness, and presence of mind in emergencies, and cunning in tight places; and rather making out that he had been having a gay and highly-coloured experience. But the more he talked and boasted, the more grave and silent the Rat became.

When at last Toad had talked himself to a standstill, there was silence for a while; and then the Rat said, Now, Toady, I dont want to give you pain, after all youve been through already; but, seriously, dont you see what an awful ass youve been making of yourself? On your own admission you have been handcuffed, imprisoned, starved, chased, terrified out of your life, insulted, jeered at, and ignominiously flung into the

water- by a woman, too! Wheres the amusement in that? Where does the fun come in? And all because you must needs go and steal a motor-car. You know that youve never had anything but trouble from motor-cars from the moment you first set eyes on one. But if you will be mixed up with them- as you generally are, five minutes after youve started- why steal them? Be a cripple, if you think its exciting; be a bankrupt, for a change, if youve set your mind on it: but why choose to be a convict? When are you going to be sensible, and think of your friends, and try and be a credit to them? Do you suppose its any pleasure to me, for instance, to hear animals saying, as I go about, that Im the chap that keeps company with gaol-birds? Now, it was a very comforting point in Toads character that he was a thoroughly good-hearted animal, and never minded being jawed by those who were his real friends. And even when most set upon a thing, he was always able to see the other side of the question. So although, while the Rat was talking so seriously, he kept saying to himself mutinously, But it was fun, though! Awful fun! and making strange suppressed noises inside him, k-i-ck-ck-ck, and poop- p-p, and other sounds resembling stifled snorts, or the opening of soda-water bottles, yet when the Rat had quite finished, he heaved a deep sigh and said, very nicely and humbly, Quite right, Ratty! How sound you always are! Yes, Ive been a conceited old ass, I can quite see that; but now Im going to be a good Toad, and not do it any more. As for motor-cars, Ive not been at all so keen about them since my last ducking in that river of yours. The fact is, while I was hanging on to the edge of your hole and getting my breath, I had a sudden idea- a really brilliant idea- connected with motor-boats- there, there! dont take on so, old chap, and stamp, and upset things; it was only an idea, and we wont talk any more about it now. Well have our coffee, and a smoke, and a quiet chat, and then Im going to stroll quietly down to Toad Hall, and get into clothes of my own, and set things going again on the old lines. Ive had enough of adventures. I shall lead a quiet, steady, respectable life, pottering about my property, and improving it, and doing a little landscape gardening at times. There will always be a bit of dinner for my friends when they come to see me; and I shall keep a pony-chaise to jog about the country in, just as I used to in the good old days, before I got restless, and wanted to do things. Stroll quietly down to Toad Hall? cried the Rat, greatly excited. What are you talking about? Do you mean to say you havent heard? Heard what? said Toad, turning rather pale. Go on, Ratty! Quick! Dont spare me! What havent I heard?

Do you mean to tell me, shouted the Rat, thumping with his little fist upon the table, that youve heard nothing about the Stoats and Weasels? What, the Wild Wooders? cried Toad, trembling in every limb. No, not a word! What have they been doing? - And how theyve been and taken Toad Hall? continued the Rat.

Toad leaned his elbows on the table, and his chin on his paws; and a large tear welled up in each of his eyes, overflowed and splashed on the table, plop! plop! Go on, Ratty, he murmured presently; tell me all. The worst is over. I am an animal again. I can bear it. When you- got- into that- that- trouble of yours, said the Rat, slowly and impressively; I mean, when you- disappeared from society for a time, over that misunderstanding about a- a machine, you know Toad merely nodded.

Well, it was a good deal talked about down here, naturally, continued the Rat, not only along the river-side, but even in the Wild Wood. Animals took sides, as always happens. The River-bankers stuck up for you, and said you had been infamously treated, and there was no justice to be had in the land nowadays.

But the Wild Wood animals said hard things, and served you right, and it was time this sort of thing was stopped. And they got very cocky, and went about saying you were done for this time! You would never come back again, never, never! Toad nodded once more, keeping silence.

Thats the sort of little beasts they are, the Rat went on. But Mole and Badger, they stuck out, through thick and thin, that you would come back again soon, somehow. They didnt know exactly how, but somehow! Toad began to sit up in his chair again, and to smirk a little.

They argued from history, continued the Rat. They said that no criminal laws had ever been known to prevail against cheek and plausibility such as yours, combined with the power of a long purse. So they arranged to move their things in to Toad Hall, and sleep there, and keep it aired, and have it all ready for you when you turned up. They didnt guess what was going to happen, of course; still, they had their suspicions of the Wild Wood animals. Now I come to the most painful and tragic part of my story. One dark night- it was a very dark night, and blowing hard, too, and raining simply cats and dogs- a band of weasels, armed to the teeth, crept silently up the carriage- drive to the front entrance. Simultaneously, a body of desperate ferrets, advancing through the kitchen-garden, possessed themselves of the backyard and offices; while a company of skirmishing stoats who stuck at nothing occupied the conservatory and the billiard-room, and held the French windows opening on to the lawn.

The Mole and the Badger were sitting by the fire in the smoking-room, telling stories and suspecting nothing, for it wasnt a night for any animals to be out in, when those bloodthirsty villains broke down the doors and rushed in upon them from every side. They made the best fight they could, but what was the good? They were unarmed, and taken by surprise, and what can two animals do against hundreds? They took and beat them severely with sticks, those two poor faithful creatures, and turned them out into the cold and the wet, with many insulting and uncalled-for remarks! Here the unfeeling Toad broke into a snigger, and then pulled himself together and tried to look particularly solemn.

And the Wild Wooders have been living in Toad Hall ever since, continued the Rat; and going on simply anyhow! Lying in bed half the day, and breakfast at all hours, and the place in such a mess (Im told) its not fit to be seen! Eating your grub, and drinking your drink, and making bad jokes about you, and singing vulgar songs, about- well, about prisons and magistrates, and policemen; horrid personal songs, with no humour in them. And theyre telling the tradespeople and everybody that theyve come to stay for good. O, have they! said Toad getting up and seizing a stick. Ill jolly soon see about that! Its no good, Toad! called the Rat after him. Youd better come back and sit down; youll only get into trouble. But the Toad was off, and there was no holding him. He marched rapidly down the road, his stick over his shoulder, fuming

and muttering to himself in his anger, till he got near his front gate, when suddenly there popped up from behind the palings a long yellow ferret with a gun. Who comes there? said the ferret sharply. Stuff and nonsense! said Toad, very angrily.

What do you mean by talking like that to me? Come out of that at once, or Ill- The ferret said never a word, but he brought his gun up to his shoulder. Toad prudently dropped flat in the road, and Bang! a bullet whistled over his head. The startled Toad scrambled to his feet and scampered off down the road as hard as he could; and as he ran he heard the ferret laughing and other horrid thin little laughs taking it up and carrying on the sound.

He went back, very crestfallen, and told the Water Rat. What did I tell you? said the Rat. Its no good. Theyve got sentries posted, and they are all armed. You must just wait. Still, Toad was not inclined to give in all at once. So he got out the boat, and set off rowing up the river to where the garden front of Toad Hall came down to the waterside. Arriving within sight of his old home, he rested on his oars and surveyed the land cautiously. All seemed very peaceful and deserted and quiet. He could see the whole front of Toad Hall, glowing in the evening sunshine, the pigeons settling by twos and threes along the straight line of the roof; the garden, a blaze of flowers; the creek that led up to the boat-house, the little wooden bridge that crossed it; all tranquil, uninhabited, apparently waiting for his return. He would try the boat-house first, he thought. Very warily he paddled up to the mouth of the creek, and was just passing under the bridge, when Crash! A great stone, dropped from above, smashed through the bottom of the boat. It filled and sank, and Toad found himself struggling in deep water. Looking up, he saw two stoats leaning over the parapet of the bridge and watching him with great glee. It will be your head next time, Toady! they called out to him. The indignant Toad swam to shore, while the stoats laughed and laughed, supporting each other, and laughed again, till they nearly had two fits- that is, one fit each, of course. The Toad retraced his weary way on foot, and related his disappointing experiences to the Water Rat once more. Well, what did I tell you? said the Rat very crossly. And, now, look here! See what youve been and done! Lost me my boat that I was so fond of, thats what youve done! And simply ruined that nice suit of clothes that I lent you! Really, Toad, of all the trying animals- I wonder you manage to keep any friends at all! The Toad saw at once how wrongly and foolishly he had acted. He admitted his errors and wrong-headedness and made a full apology to Rat for losing his boat and spoiling his clothes. And he wound up by saying, with that frank selfsurrender which always disarmed his friends criticism and won them back to his side, Ratty! I see that I have been a headstrong and a wilful Toad! Henceforth, believe me, I will be humble and submissive, and will take no action without your kind advice and full approval! If that is really so, said the good-natured Rat, already appeased, then my advice to you is, considering the lateness of the hour, to sit down and have your supper, which will be on the table in a minute, and be very patient. For I am convinced that we can do nothing until we have seen the

Mole and the Badger, and heard their latest news, and held conference and taken their advice in this difficult matter. Oh, ah, yes, of course, the Mole and the Badger, said Toad, lightly. Whats become of them, the dear fellows? I had forgotten all about them. Well may you ask! said the Rat reproachfully. While you were riding about the country in expensive motor-cars, and galloping proudly on blood-horses, and breakfasting on the fat of the land, those two poor devoted animals have been camping out in the open, in every sort of weather, living very rough by day and lying very hard by night; watching over your house, patrolling your boundaries, keeping a constant eye on the stoats and the weasels, scheming and planning and contriving how to get your property back for you. You dont deserve to have such true and loyal friends, Toad, you dont, really. Some day, when its too late, youll be sorry you didnt value them more while you had them! Im an ungrateful beast, I know, sobbed Toad, shedding bitter tears. Let me go out and find them, out into the cold, dark night, and share their hardships, and try and prove by- Hold on a bit! Surely I heard the chink of dishes on a tray! Suppers here at last, hooray! Come on, Ratty! The Rat remembered that poor Toad had been on prison fare for a considerable time, and that large allowances had therefore to be made. He followed him to the table accordingly, and hospitably encouraged him in his gallant efforts to make up for past privations.

They had just finished their meal and resumed their arm-chairs, when there came a heavy knock at the door. Toad was nervous, but the Rat, nodding mysteriously at him, went straight up to the door and opened it, and in walked Mr. Badger.

He had all the appearance of one who for some nights had been kept away from home and all its little comforts and conveniences. His shoes were covered with mud, and he was looking very rough and touzled; but then he had never been a very smart man, the Badger, at the best of times. He came solemnly up to Toad, shook him by the paw, and said, Welcome home, Toad! Alas! what am I saying? Home, indeed! This is a poor home-coming. Unhappy Toad! Then he turned his back on him, sat down to the table, drew his chair up, and helped himself to a large slice of cold pie.

Toad was quite alarmed at this very serious and portentous style of greeting; but the Rat whispered to him, Never mind; dont take any notice; and dont say anything to him just yet. Hes always rather low and despondent when hes wanting his victuals. In half an hours time hell be quite a different animal. So they waited in silence, and presently there came another and a lighter knock. The Rat, with a nod to Toad, went to the door and ushered in the Mole, very shabby and unwashed, with bits of hay and straw sticking in his fur.

Hooray! Heres old Toad! cried the Mole, his face beaming. Fancy having you back again! And he began to dance round him. We never dreamt you would turn up so soon! Why, you must have managed to escape, you clever, ingenious, intelligent Toad! The Rat, alarmed, pulled him by the elbow; but it was too late.

Toad was puffing and swelling already. Clever? O, no! he said. Im not really clever, according to my friends. Ive only broken out of the strongest prison in England, thats all! And captured a railway train and escaped on it, thats all! And disguised myself and gone about the country humbugging

everybody, thats all! O, no! Im a stupid ass, I am! Ill tell you one or two of my little adventures, Mole, and you shall judge for yourself! Well, well, said the Mole, moving towards the supper-table; supposing you talk while I eat. Not a bite since breakfast! O my! O my! And he sat down and helped himself liberally to cold beef and pickles. Toad straddled on the hearth-rug, thrust his paw into his trouser-pocket and pulled out a handful of silver. Look at that! he cried, displaying it. Thats not so bad, is it, for a few minutes work? And how do you think I done it, Mole? Horsedealing! Thats how I done it!

Go on, Toad, said the Mole, immensely interested. Toad, do be quiet, please! said the Rat. And dont you egg him on, Mole, when you know what he is; but please tell us as soon as possible what the position is, and whats best to be done, now that Toad is back at last. The positions about as bad as it can be, replied the Mole grumpily; and as for whats to be done, why, blest if I know! The Badger and I have been round and round the place, by night and by day; always the same thing. Sentries posted everywhere, guns poked out at us, stones thrown at us; always an animal on the look-out, and when they see us, my! how they do laugh! Thats what annoys me most! Its a very difficult situation, said the Rat, reflecting deeply. But I think I see now, in the depths of my mind, what Toad really ought to do. I will tell you. He ought to- No, he oughtnt! shouted the Mole, with his mouth full. Nothing of the sort! You dont understand. What he ought to do is, he ought to- Well, I shant do it, anyway! cried Toad, getting excited. Im not going to be ordered about by you fellows! Its my house were talking about, and I know exactly what to do, and Ill tell you. Im going to- By this time they were all three talking at once, at the top of their voices, and the noise was simply deafening, when a thin, dry voice made itself heard, saying, Be quiet at once, all of you! and instantly every one was silent. It was the Badger, who, having finished his pie, had turned round in his chair and was looking at them severely. When he saw that he had secured their attention, and that they were evidently waiting for him to address them, he turned back to the table again and reached out for the cheese. And so great was the respect commanded by the solid qualities of that admirable animal, that not another word was uttered until he had quite finished his repast and brushed the crumbs from his knees. The Toad fidgeted a good deal, but the Rat held him firmly down. When the Badger had quite done, he got up from his seat and stood before the fireplace, reflecting deeply. At last he spoke. Toad! he said severely. You bad, troublesome little animal! Arent you ashamed of yourself? What do you think your father, my old friend, would have said if he had been here to-night, and had known of all your goings on? Toad, who was on the sofa by this time, with his legs up, rolled over on his face, shaken by sobs of contrition. There, there! went on the Badger, more kindly. Never mind. Stop crying. Were going to let bygones be bygones, and try and turn over a new leaf. But what the Mole says is quite true. The stoats are on guard, at every point, and they make the best sentinels in the world. Its quite useless to think of attacking the place. Theyre too

strong for us. Then its all over, sobbed the Toad, crying into the sofa cushions. I shall go and enlist for a soldier, and never see my dear Toad Hall any more! Come, cheer up, Toady! said the Badger. There are more ways of getting back a place than taking it by storm. I havent said my last word yet. Now Im going to tell you a great secret. Toad sat up slowly and dried his eyes. Secrets had an immense attraction for him, because he never could keep one, and he enjoyed the sort of unhallowed thrill he experienced when he went and told another animal, after having faithfully promised not to.

There- is- an- underground- passage, said the Badger, impressively, that leads from the river-bank, quite near here, right up into the middle of Toad Hall. O, nonsense! Badger, said Toad, rather airily. Youve been listening to some of the yarns they spin in the public-houses about here. I know every inch of Toad Hall, inside and out. Nothing of the sort, I do assure you! My young friend, said the Badger, with great severity, your father, who was a worthy animal- a lot worthier than some others I know- was a particular friend of mine, and told me a great deal he wouldnt have dreamt of telling you. He discovered that passage- he didnt make it, of course; that was done hundreds of years before he ever came to live there- and he repaired it and cleaned it out, because he thought it might come in useful some day, in case of trouble or danger; and he showed it to me. Dont let my son know about it, he said. Hes a good boy, but very light and volatile in character, and simply cannot hold his tongue. If hes ever in a real fix, and it would be of use to him, you may tell him about the secret passage; but not before.

The other animals looked hard at Toad to see how he would take it. Toad was inclined to be sulky at first; but he brightened up immediately, like the good fellow he was. Well, well, he said; perhaps I am a bit of a talker. A popular fellow such as I am- my friends get round me- we chaff, we sparkle, we tell witty stories- and somehow my tongue gets wagging. I have the gift of conversation. Ive been told I ought to have a salon, whatever that may be. Never mind. Go on, Badger. Hows this passage of yours going to help us? Ive found out a thing or two lately, continued the Badger. I got Otter to disguise himself as a sweep and call at the back-door with brushes over his shoulder, asking for a job. Theres going to be a big banquet to-morrow night. Its somebodys birthday- the Chief Weasels, I believe- and all the weasels will be gathered together in the dining-hall, eating and drinking and laughing and carrying on, suspecting nothing. No guns, no swords, no sticks, no arms of any sort whatever! But the sentinels will be posted as usual, remarked the Rat.

Exactly, said the Badger; that is my point. The weasels will trust entirely to their excellent sentinels. And that is where the passage comes in. That very useful tunnel leads right up under the butlers pantry, next to the dining-hall! Aha! that squeaky board in the butlers pantry! said Toad. Now I understand it!

We shall creep out quietly into the butlers pantry- cried the Mole. -with our pistols and swords and sticks- shouted the Rat. -and rush in upon them, said the Badger. -and whack em, and whack em, and whack em! cried the Toad in ecstasy, running round and round the room, and jumping over the chairs.

Very well, then, said the Badger, resuming his usual dry manner, our plan is settled, and theres nothing more for you to argue and squabble about. So, as its getting very late, all of you go right off to bed at once. We will make all the necessary arrangements in the course of the morning to-morrow. Toad, of course, went off to bed dutifully with the rest- he knew better than to refuse- though he was feeling much too excited to sleep. But he had had a long day, with many events crowded into it; and sheets and blankets were very friendly and comforting things, after plain straw, and not too much of it, spread on the stone floor of a draughty cell; and his head had not been many seconds on his pillow before he was snoring happily. Naturally, he dreamt a good deal; about roads that ran away from him just when he wanted them, and canals that chased him and caught him, and a barge that sailed into the banqueting-hall with his weeks washing, just as he was giving a dinner-party; and he was alone in the secret passage, pushing onwards, but it twisted and turned round and shook itself, and sat up on its end; yet somehow, at the last, he found himself back in Toad Hall, safe and triumphant, with all his friends gathered round about him, earnestly assuring him that he really was a clever Toad.

He slept till a late hour next morning, and by the time he got down he found that the other animals had finished their breakfast some time before. The Mole had slipped off somewhere by himself, without telling any one where he was going to. The Badger sat in the arm-chair, reading the paper, and not concerning himself in the slightest about what was going to happen that very evening. The Rat, on the other hand, was running round the room busily, with his arms full of weapons of every kind, distributing them in four little heaps on the floor, and saying excitedly under his breath, as he ran, Heres-a-sword-for-the-Rat, heres-asword-for-the-Mole, heres-a-sword-for-the-Toad, heres-a-sword-for-the-Badger! Heres-a-pistol-for-the-Rat, heres-a-pistol-for-the-Mole, heres-a-pistol-for-theToad, heres-a-pistol-for-the-Badger! And so on, in a regular, rhythmical way, while the four little heaps gradually grew and grew.

Thats all very well, Rat, said the Badger presently, looking at the busy little animal over the edge of his newspaper; Im not blaming you. But just let us once get past the stoats, with those detestable guns of theirs, and I assure you we shant want any swords or pistols. We four, with our sticks, once were inside the dininghall, why, we shall clear the floor of all the lot of them in five minutes. Id have done the whole thing by myself, only I didnt want to deprive you fellows of the fun!

Its as well to be on the safe side, said the Rat reflectively, polishing a pistolbarrel on his sleeve and looking along it. The Toad, having finished his breakfast, picked up a stout stick and swung it vigorously, belabouring imaginary animals. Ill learn em to steal my house! he cried. Ill learn em, Ill learn em! Dont say learn em, Toad, said the Rat, greatly shocked. Its not good English. What are you always nagging at Toad for? inquired the Badger, rather peevishly. Whats the matter with his English? Its the same what I use myself, and if its good enough for me, it ought to be good enough for you! Im very sorry, said the Rat humbly. Only I think it ought to be teach em, not learn em. But we dont want to teach em, replied the Badger. We want to learn emlearn em, learn em! And whats more, were going to do it, too! Oh, very well, have it your

own way, said the Rat. He was getting rather muddled about it himself, and presently he retired into a corner, where he could be heard muttering, Learn em, teach em, teach em, learn em! till the Badger told him rather sharply to leave off. Presently the Mole came tumbling into the room, evidently very pleased with himself. Ive been having such fun! he began at once; Ive been getting a rise out of the stoats! I hope youve been very careful, Mole? said the Rat anxiously.

I should hope so, too, said the Mole confidently. I got the idea when I went into the kitchen, to see about Toads breakfast being kept hot for him. I found that old washerwoman-dress that he came home in yesterday, hanging on a towelhorse before the fire. So I put it on, and the bonnet as well, and the shawl, and off I went to Toad Hall, as bold as you please. The sentries were on the look-out, of course, with their guns and their Who comes there? and all the rest of their nonsense. Good morning, gentlemen! says I, very respectful. Want any washing done to-day? They looked at me very proud and stiff and haughty, and said, Go away, washerwoman! We dont do any washing on duty. Or any other time? says I.

Ho, ho, ho! Wasnt I funny, Toad? Poor, frivolous animal! said Toad, very loftily. The fact is, he felt exceedingly jealous of Mole for what he had just done. It was exactly what he would have liked to have done himself, if only he had thought of it first, and hadnt gone and overslept himself.

Some of the stoats turned quite pink, continued the Mole, and the Sergeant in charge, he said to me, very short, he said, Now run away, my good woman, run away! Dont keep my men idling and talking on their posts. Run away? says I; it wont be me thatll be running away, in a very short time from now! O Moly, how could you? said the Rat, dismayed.

The Badger laid down his paper. I could see them pricking up their ears and looking at each other, went on the Mole; and the Sergeant said to them, Never mind her; she doesnt know what shes talking about. O! dont I? said I. Well, let me tell you this. My daughter, she washes for Mr. Badger, and thatll show you whether I know what Im talking about; and youll know pretty soon, too! A hundred bloodthirsty badgers, armed with rifles, are going to attack Toad Hall this very night, by way of the paddock. Six boatloads of Rats, with pistols and cutlasses, will come up the river and effect a landing in the garden; while a picked body of Toads, known as the Die-hards, or the Death-or-Glory Toads, will storm the orchard and carry everything before them, yelling for vengeance. There wont be much left of you to wash, by the time theyve done with you, unless you clear out while you have the chance! Then I ran away, and when I was out of sight I hid; and presently I came creeping back along the ditch and took a peep at them through the hedge. They were all as nervous and flustered as could be, running all ways at once, and falling over each other, and every one giving orders to everybody else and not listening; and the Sergeant kept sending off parties of stoats to distant parts of the grounds, and then sending other fellows to fetch em back again; and I heard them saying to each other, Thats just like the weasels; theyre to stop comfortably in the banquetinghall, and have feasting and toasts and songs and all sorts of fun, while we must stay on guard in the cold and the dark, and in the end be cut to pieces by

bloodthirsty Badgers! Oh, you silly ass, Mole! cried Toad, Youve been and spoilt everything! Mole, said the Badger, in his dry, quiet way, I perceive you have more sense in your little finger than some other animals have in the whole of their fat bodies. You have managed excellently, and I begin to have great hopes of you.

Good Mole! Clever Mole! The Toad was simply wild with jealousy, more especially as he couldnt make out for the life of him what the Mole had done that was so particularly clever; but, fortunately for him, before he could show temper or expose himself to the Badgers sarcasm, the bell rang for luncheon.

It was a simple but sustaining meal- bacon and broad beans, and a macaroni pudding; and when they had quite done, the Badger settled himself into an armchair, and said, Well, weve got our work cut out for us to-night, and it will probably be pretty late before were quite through with it; so Im just going to take forty winks, while I can. And he drew a handkerchief over his face and was soon snoring.

The anxious and laborious Rat at once resumed his preparations, and started running between his four little heaps, muttering, Heres-a-belt-for-the-Rat, heresa-belt-for-the- Mole, heres-a-belt-for-the-Toad, heres-a-belt-for-the-Badger! and so on, with every fresh accoutrement he produced, to which there seemed really no end; so the Mole drew his arm through Toads, led him out into the open air, shoved him into a wicker chair, and made him tell him all his adventures from beginning to end, which Toad was only too willing to do. The Mole was a good listener, and Toad, with no one to check his statements or to criticise in an unfriendly spirit, rather let himself go. Indeed, much that he related belonged more properly to the category of what-might-have- happened-had-I-only- thought-of-itin-time-instead-of-ten-minutes-afterwards. Those are always the best and the raciest adventures; and why should they not be truly ours, as much as the somewhat inadequate things that really come off?
WHEN it began to grow dark, the Rat, with an air of excitement and mystery, summoned them back into the parlour, stood each of them up alongside of his little heap, and proceeded to dress them up for the coming expedition. He was very earnest and thorough-going about it, and the affair took quite a long time. First, there was a belt to go round each animal, and then a sword to be stuck into each belt, and then a cutlass on the other side to balance it. Then a pair of pistols, a policemans truncheon, several sets of handcuffs, some bandages and sticking-plaster, and a flask and a sandwich-case. The Badger laughed good-humouredly and said, All right, Ratty! It amuses you and it doesnt hurt me. Im going to do all Ive got to do with this here stick. But the Rat only said, Please, Badger. You know I shouldnt like you to blame me afterwards and say I had forgotten anything! When all was quite ready, the Badger took a dark lantern in one paw, grasped his great stick with the other, and said, Now then, follow me! Mole first, cos Im very pleased with him; Rat next; Toad last. And look here, Toady! Dont you chatter so much as usual, or youll be sent back, as sure as fate!

The Toad was so anxious not to be left out that he took up the inferior position assigned to him without a murmur, and the animals set off. The Badger led them along by the river for a little way, and then suddenly swung himself over the edge into a hole in the river-bank, a little above the water. The Mole and the Rat followed silently, swinging themselves successfully into the hole as they had seen the Badger do; but when it came to Toads turn, of course he managed to slip and fall into the water with a loud splash and a squeal of alarm. He was hauled out by his friends, rubbed down and wrung out hastily, comforted, and set on his legs; but the Badger was seriously angry, and told him that the very next time be made a fool of himself he would most certainly be left behind.

So at last they were in the secret passage, and the cutting-out expedition had really begun! It was cold, and dark, and damp, and low, and narrow, and poor Toad began to shiver, partly from dread of what might be before him, partly because he was wet through. The lantern was far ahead, and he could not help lagging behind a little in the darkness. Then he heard the Rat call out warningly, Come on, Toad! and a terror seized him of being left behind, alone in the darkness, and he came on with such a rush that he upset the Rat into the Mole and the Mole into the Badger, and for a moment all was confusion. The Badger thought they were being attacked from behind, and, as there was no room to use a stick or a cutlass, drew a pistol, and was on the point of putting a bullet into Toad. When he found out what had really happened he was very angry indeed, and said, Now this time that tiresome Toad shall be left behind! But Toad whimpered, and the other two promised that they would be answerable for his good conduct, and at last the Badger was pacified, and the

procession moved on; only this time the Rat brought up the rear, with a firm grip on the shoulder of Toad. So they groped and shuffled along, with their ears pricked up and their paws on their pistols, till at last the Badger said, We ought by now to be pretty nearly under the Hall. Then suddenly they heard, far away as it might be, and yet apparently nearly over their heads, a confused murmur of sound, as if people were shouting and cheering and stamping on the floor and hammering on tables. The Toads nervous terrors all returned, but the Badger only remarked placidly, They are going it, the Weasels! The passage now began to slope upwards; they groped onward a little further, and then the noise broke out again, quite distinct this time, and very close above them. Ooo-ray-oo- ray-oo-ray-ooray! they heard, and the stamping of little feet on the floor, and the clinking of glasses as little fists pounded on the table. What a time theyre having! said the Badger. Come on! They hurried along the passage till it came to a full stop, and they found themselves standing under the trapdoor that led up into the butlers pantry. Such a tremendous noise was going on in the banqueting-hall that there was little danger of their being overheard. The Badger said, Now, boys, all together!

and the four of them put their shoulders to the trap-door and heaved it back. Hoisting each other up, they found themselves standing in the pantry, with only a door between them and the banqueting-hall, where their unconscious enemies were carousing. The noise, as they emerged from the passage, was simply deafening. At last, as the cheering and hammering slowly subsided, a voice could be made out saying, Well, I do not propose to detain you much longer- (great applause)- but before I resume my seat- (renewed cheering)- I should like to say one word about our kind host, Mr. Toad. We all know Toad!- (great laughter)- Good Toad, modest Toad, honest Toad! (shrieks of merriment).

Only just let me get at him! muttered Toad, grinding his teeth. Hold hard a minute! said the Badger, restraining him with difficulty. Get ready, all of you! -Let me sing you a little song, went on the voice, which I have composed on the subject of Toad- (prolonged applause). Then the Chief Weasel- for it was he- began in a high, squeaky voice Toad he went a- pleasuring Gaily down the street- The Badger drew himself up, took a firm grip of his stick with both paws, glanced round at his comrades, and criedThe hour is come! Follow me! And flung the door open wide. My! What a squealing and a squeaking and a screeching filled the air! Well might the terrified weasels dive under the tables and spring madly up at the windows! Well might the ferrets rush wildly for the fireplace and get hopelessly jammed in the chimney! Well might tables and chairs be upset, and glass and china be sent crashing on the floor, in the panic of that terrible moment when the four Heroes strode wrathfully into the room! The mighty Badger, his whiskers bristling, his great cudgel whistling through the air; Mole, black and grim, brandishing his stick and shouting his awful war-cry, A Mole! A Mole! Rat, desperate and determined, his belt bulging with weapons of every age and every variety; Toad, frenzied with excitement

and injured pride, swollen to twice his ordinary size, leaping into the air and emitting Toad-whoops that chilled them to the marrow! Toad he went a-pleasuring! he yelled. Ill pleasure em! and he went straight for the Chief Weasel. They were but four in all, but to the panic-stricken weasels the hall seemed full of monstrous animals, grey, black, brown and yellow, whooping and flourishing enormous cudgels; and they broke and fled with squeals of terror and dismay, this way and that, through the windows, up the chimney, anywhere to get out of reach of those terrible sticks.

The affair was soon over. Up and down, the whole length of the hall, strode the four Friends, whacking with their sticks at every head that showed itself; and in five minutes the room was cleared. Through the broken windows the shrieks of terrified weasels escaping across the lawn were borne faintly to their cars; on the floor lay prostrate some dozen or so of the enemy, on whom the Mole was busily engaged in fitting handcuffs. The Badger, resting from his labours, leant on his stick and wiped his honest brow.

Mole, he said, youre the best of fellows! Just cut along outside and look after those stoat-sentries of yours, and see what theyre doing. Ive an idea that, thanks to you, we shant have much trouble from them to-night! The Mole vanished promptly through a window; and the Badger bade the other two set a table on its legs again, pick up knives and forks and plates and glasses from the debris on the floor, and see if they could find materials for a supper. I want some grub, I do, he said, in that rather common way he had of speaking. Stir your stumps, Toad, and look lively! Weve got your house back for you, and you dont offer us so much as a sandwich. Toad felt rather hurt that the Badger didnt say pleasant things to him, as he had to the Mole, and tell him what a fine fellow he was, and how splendidly he had fought; for he was rather particularly pleased with himself and the way he had gone for the Chief Weasel and sent him flying across the table with one blow of his stick. But he bustled about, and so did the Rat, and soon they found some guava jelly in a glass dish, and a cold chicken, a tongue that had hardly been touched, some trifle, and quite a lot of lobster salad; and in the pantry they came upon a basketful of French rolls and any quantity of cheese, butter, and celery. They were just about to sit down when the Mole clambered in through the window, chuckling, with an armful of rifles.

Its all over, he reported. From what I can make out, as soon as the stoats, who were very nervous and jumpy already, heard the shrieks and the yells and the uproar inside the hall, some of them threw down their rifles and fled. The others stood fast for a bit, but when the weasels came rushing out upon them they thought they were betrayed; and the stoats grappled with the weasels, and the weasels fought to get away, and they wrestled and wriggled and punched each other, and rolled over and over, till most of em rolled into the river! Theyve all disappeared by now, one way or another; and Ive got their rifles. So thats all right! Excellent and deserving animal! said the Badger, his mouth full of chicken and trifle. Now, theres just one more thing I want you to do, Mole, before you sit down to your supper along of us; and I wouldnt trouble you only I know I can trust you to see a thing done, and I wish I could say the same of every one I know. Id send Rat, if he wasnt a poet. I want you to take those fellows on the floor there upstairs with you, and have some bedrooms cleaned out and tidied up and made

really comfortable. See that they sweep under the beds, and put clean sheets and pillow-cases on, and turn down one corner of the bed-clothes, just as you know it ought to be done; and have a can of hot water, and clean towels, and fresh cakes of soap, put in each room. And then you can give them a licking apiece, if its any satisfaction to you, and put them out by the back-door, and we shant see any more of them, I fancy. And then come along and have some of this cold tongue. Its first rate. Im very pleased with you, Mole! The goodnatured Mole picked up a stick, formed his prisoners up in a line on the floor, gave them the order Quick march! and led his squad off to the upper floor. After a time, he appeared again, smiling, and said that every room was ready, and as clean as a new pin. And I didnt have to lick them, either, he added. I thought, on the whole, they had had licking enough for one night, and the weasels, when I put the point to them, quite agreed with me, and said they wouldnt think of troubling me. They were very penitent, and said they were extremely sorry for what they had done, but it was all the fault of the Chief Weasel and the stoats, and if ever they could do anything for us at any time to make up, we had only got to mention it. So I gave them a roll a-piece, and let them out at the back, and off they ran, as hard as they could! Then the Mole pulled his chair up to the table, and pitched into the cold tongue; and Toad, like the gentleman he was, put all his jealousy from him, and said heartily, Thank you kindly, dear Mole, for all your pains and trouble tonight, and especially for your cleverness this morning! The Badger was pleased at that, and said, There spoke my brave Toad! So they finished their supper in great joy and contentment, and presently retired to rest between clean sheets, safe in Toads ancestral home, won back by matchless valour, consummate strategy, and a proper handling of sticks.

The following morning, Toad, who had overslept himself as usual, came down to breakfast disgracefully late, and found on the table a certain quantity of egg-shells, some fragments of cold and leathery toast, a coffee-pot three-fourths empty, and really very little else; which did not tend to improve his temper, considering that, after all, it was his own house. Through the French windows of the breakfast-room he could see the Mole and the Water Rat sitting in wicker-chairs out on the lawn, evidently telling each other stories; roaring with laughter and kicking their short legs up in the air. The Badger, who was in an arm-chair and deep in the morning paper, merely looked up and nodded when Toad entered the room. But Toad knew his man, so he sat down and made the best breakfast he could, merely observing to himself that he would get square with the others sooner or later. When he had nearly finished, the Badger looked up and remarked rather shortly: Im sorry, Toad, but Im afraid theres a heavy mornings work in front of you. You see, we really ought to have a Banquet at once, to celebrate this affair. Its expected of you- in fact, its the rule. O, all right! said the Toad, readily. Anything to oblige. Though why on earth you should want to have a Banquet in the morning I cannot understand. But you know I do not live to please myself, but merely to find out what my friends want, and then try and arrange it for em, you dear old Badger!

Dont pretend to be stupider than you really are, replied the Badger, crossly; and dont chuckle and splutter in your coffee while youre talking; its not manners. What I mean is, the Banquet will be at night, of course, but the invitations will have to be

written and got off at once, and youve got to write em. Now, sit down at that table- theres stacks of letter-paper on it, with Toad Hall at the top in blue and gold- and write invitations to all our friends, and if you stick to it we shall get them out before luncheon. And Ill bear a hand, too; and take my share of the burden. Ill order the Banquet. What! cried Toad, dismayed. Me stop indoors and write a lot of rotten letters on a jolly morning like this, when I want to go around my property, and set everything and everybody to rights, and swagger about and enjoy myself! Certainly not! Ill be- Ill see you- Stop a minute, though! Why, of course, dear Badger! What is my pleasure or convenience compared with that of others! You wish it done, and it shall be done. Go, Badger, order the Banquet, order what you like; then join our young friends outside in their innocent mirth, oblivious of me and my cares and toils. I sacrifice this fair morning on the altar of duty and friendship! The Badger looked at him very suspiciously, but Toads frank, open countenance made it difficult to suggest any unworthy motive in this change of attitude.

He quitted the room, accordingly, in the direction of the kitchen, and as soon as the door had closed behind him, Toad hurried to the writing-table. A fine idea had occurred to him while he was talking. He would write the invitations; and he would take care to mention the leading part he had taken in the fight, and how he had laid the Chief Weasel flat; and he would hint at his adventures, and what a career of triumph he had to tell about; and on the fly-leaf he would set out a sort of a programme of entertainment for the evening- something like this, as he sketched it out in his head: SPEECH By TOAD (There will be other speeches by TOAD during the evening.) ADDRESS BY TOAD SYNOPSIS

Our Prison System, the Waterways of Old England
Horse-dealing, and how to deal
Property, its rights and its duties
Back to the Land
A Typical English Squire. SONG BY TOAD (Composed by himself.) OTHER COMPOSITIONS BY TOAD will be sung in the course of the evening by the COMPOSER. The idea pleased him mightily, and he worked very hard and got all the letters finished by noon, at which hour it was reported to him that there was a small and rather bedraggled weasel at the door, inquiring timidly whether he could be of any service to the gentlemen. Toad swaggered out and found it was one of the prisoners of the previous evening, very respectful and anxious to please. He patted him on the head, shoved the bundle of invitations into his paw, and told him to cut along quick and deliver them as fast as he could, and if he liked to come back again in the evening, perhaps there might be a shilling for him, or, again, perhaps there mightnt; and the poor weasel seemed really quite grateful, and hurried off eagerly to do his mission. When the other animals came back to luncheon, very boisterous and breezy after a morning on the river, the Mole, whose conscience had been pricking him, looked
doubtfully at Toad, expecting to find him sulky or depressed. Instead, he was so uppish and inflated that the Mole began to suspect something; while the Rat and the Badger exchanged significant glances.

As soon as the meal was over, Toad thrust his paws deep into his trouser-pockets, remarked casually, Well, look after yourselves, you fellows! Ask for anything you want! and was swaggering off in the direction of the garden, where he wanted to think out an idea or two for his coming speeches, when the Rat caught him by the arm.

Toad rather suspected what he was after, and did his best to get away; but when the Badger took him firmly by the other arm he began to see that the game was up. The two animals conducted him between them into the small smokingroom that opened out of the entrance-hall, shut the door, and put him into a chair.

Then they both stood in front of him, while Toad sat silent and regarded them with much suspicion and ill-humour.

Now, look here, Toad, said the Rat. Its about this Banquet, and very sorry I am to have to speak to you like this. But we want you to understand clearly, once and for all, that there are going to be no speeches and no songs. Try and grasp the fact that on this occasion were not arguing with you; were just telling you. Toad saw that he was trapped. They understood him, they saw through him, they had got ahead of him. His pleasant dream was shattered.

Maynt I sing them just one little song? he pleaded piteously.

No, not one little song, replied the Rat firmly, though his heart bled as he noticed the trembling lip of the poor disappointed Toad. Its no good, Toady; you know well that your songs are all conceit and boasting and vanity; and your speeches are all self-praise and- and- well, and gross exaggeration and- and- And gas, put in the Badger, in his common way.

Its for your own good, Toady, went on the Rat. You know you must turn over a new leaf sooner or later, and now seems a splendid time to begin; a sort of turning-point in your career. Please dont think that saying all this doesnt hurt me more than it hurts you.

Toad remained a long while plunged in thought. At last he raised his head, and the traces of strong emotion were visible on his features. You have conquered, my friends, he said in broken accents. It was, to be sure, but a small thing that I asked- merely leave to blossom and expand for yet one more evening, to let myself go and hear the tumultuous applause that always seems to me- somehow- to bring out my best qualities. However, you are right, I know, and I am wrong. Henceforth I will be a very different Toad. My friends, you shall never have occasion to blush for me again. But, O dear, O dear, this is a hard world! And, pressing his handkerchief to his face, he left the room, with faltering footsteps.

Badger, said the Rat, I feel like a brute; I wonder what you feel like? O, I know, I know, said the Badger gloomily. But the thing had to be done.

This good fellow has got to live here, and hold his own, and be respected. Would you have him a common laughing-stock, mocked and jeered at by stoats and weasels? Of course not, said the Rat. And, talking of weasels, its lucky we came upon that little weasel, just as he was setting out with Toads invitations. I suspected something from what you told me, and had a look at one or two; they were simply disgraceful. I confiscated the lot, and the good Mole is now sitting in the blue boudoir, filling up plain, simple invitation cards.

At last the hour for the banquet began to draw near, and Toad, who on leaving the others had retired to his bedroom, was still sitting there, melancholy and thoughtful. His brow resting on his paw, he pondered long and deeply. Gradually his countenance cleared, and he began to smile long, slow smiles. Then he took to giggling in a shy, self- conscious manner. At last he got up, locked the door, drew the curtains across the windows, collected all the chairs in the room and arranged them in a semicircle, and took up his position in front of them, swelling visibly.

Then he bowed, coughed twice, and, letting himself go, with uplifted voice he sang, to the enraptured audience that his imagination so clearly saw, TOADS LAST LITTLE SONG!

The Toad- came- home! There was panic in the parlours and howling in the halls, There was crying in the cow-sheds and shrieking in the stalls, When the Toad- came- home!

When the Toad- came- home! There was smashing in of window and crashing in of door, There was chivvying of weasels that fainted on the floor, When the Toad- came- home! Bang! go the drums! The trumpeters are tooting and the soldiers are saluting, And the cannon they are shooting and the motor-cars are hooting, As the- Hero- comes!

Shout- Hoo-ray! And let each one of the crowd try and shout it very loud, In honour of an animal of whom youre justly proud, For its Toads- great- day!

He sang this very loud, with great unction and expression; and when he had done, he sang it all over again.

Then he heaved a deep sigh; a long, long, long sigh.

Then he dipped his hairbrush in the water-jug, parted his hair in the middle, and plastered it down very straight and sleek on each side of his face; and, unlocking the door, went quietly down the stairs to greet his guests, who he knew must be assembling in the drawing-room.

All the animals cheered when he entered, and crowded round to congratulate him and say nice things about his courage, and his cleverness, and his fighting qualities; but Toad only smiled faintly, and murmured, Not at all! Or, sometimes, for a change, On the contrary! Otter, who was standing on the hearthrug, describing to an admiring circle of friends exactly how he would have managed things had be been there, came forward with a shout, threw his arm round Toads neck, and tried to take him round the room in triumphal progress; but Toad, in a mild way, was rather snubby to him, remarking gently, as he disengaged himself, Badgers was the mastermind; the Mole and the Water Rat bore the brunt of the fighting; I merely served in the ranks and did

little or nothing. The animals were evidently puzzled and taken aback by this unexpected attitude of his; and Toad felt, as he moved from one guest to the other, making his modest responses, that he was an object of absorbing interest to every one.

The Badger had ordered everything of the best, and the banquet was a great success. There was much talking and laughter and chaff among the animals, but through it all Toad, who of course was in the chair, looked down his nose and murmured pleasant nothings to the animals on either side of him. At intervals he stole a glance at the Badger and the Rat, and always when he looked they were staring at each other with their mouths open; and this gave him the greatest satisfaction. Some of the younger and livelier animals, as the evening wore on, got whispering to each other that things were not so amusing as they used to be in the good old days; and there were some knockings on the table and cries of Toad!

Speech! Speech from Toad! Song! Mr. Toads song! But Toad only shook his head gently, raised one paw in mild protest, and, by pressing delicacies on his guests, by topical small-talk, and by earnest inquiries after members of their families not yet old enough to appear at social functions, managed to convey to them that this dinner was being run on strictly conventional lines.

He was indeed an altered Toad! After this climax, the four animals continued to lead their lives, so rudely broken in upon by civil war, in great joy and contentment, undisturbed by further risings or invasions. Toad, after due consultation with his friends, selected a handsome gold chain and locket set with pearls, which he dispatched to the gaolers daughter with a letter that even the Badger admitted to be modest, grateful, and appreciative; and the engine-driver, in his turn, was properly thanked and compensated for all his pains and trouble. Under severe compulsion from the Badger, even the barge-woman was, with some trouble, sought out and the value of her horse discreetly made good to her; though Toad kicked terribly at this, holding himself to be an instrument of Fate, sent to punish fat women with mottled arms who couldnt tell a real gentleman when they saw one. The amount involved, it was true, was not very burdensome, the gipsys valuation being admitted by local assessors to be approximately correct.

Sometimes, in the course of long summer evenings, the friends would take a stroll together in the Wild Wood, now successfully tamed so far as they were concerned; and it was pleasing to see how respectfully they were greeted by the in habitants, and how the mother-weasels would bring their young ones to the mouths of their holes, and say, pointing, Look, baby! There goes the great Mr. Toad! And thats the gallant Water Rat, a terrible fighter, walking along o him! And yonder comes the famous Mr. Mole, of whom you so often have heard your father tell! But when their infants were fractious and quite beyond control, they would quiet them by telling how, if they didnt hush them and not fret them, the terrible grey Badger would up and get them. This was a base libel on Badger, who, though he cared little about Society, was rather fond of children; but it never failed to have its full effect.

 

THE END

About this Book

The Wind in the Willows by Kenneth Grahame is a classic fantasy featuring the characters of Mole, Water Rat, Mr. Toad and other small animals.

Loved by many children since its first publication, Wind in the Willows has long since been considered a classic of childrens literature, with movies and television series among its credits .

A childrens novel by Kenneth Grahame (1859-1932), first published in 1908, Alternately slow moving and fast paced, it focuses on four anthropomorphized animals in a pastoral version of Edwardian England. The novel is notable for its mixture of mysticism, adventure, morality and camaraderie, and celebrated for its evocation of the nature of the Thames Valley.

 

In 1908, Grahame retired from his position as secretary of the Bank of England. He moved back to Berkshire, where he had lived as a child, and spent his time by the River Thames doing much as the animal characters in his book do  as the book says, simply messing about in boats  and expanding the bedtime stories he had earlier told his son Alastair into a manuscript for the book.

 

The novel was in its 31st printing when playwright A. A. Milne adapted part of it for the stage as Toad of Toad Hall in 1929. Almost a century later, it was adapted again for the stage as a musical by Julian Fellowes. In 2003, The Wind in the Willows was listed at number 16 in the BBCs survey The Big Read.

hello